Gastrointestinal diseases
● Define atresia
congenitally interrupted hollow organ
● Define fistula
abnormal connection between two hollow structures
● Describe esophageal atresia
○ most common congenital abnormality of the esophagus
○ Unknown pathophysiology
○ Is a congenital interruption of the esophagus with or without a
tracheoesophageal fistula
○ Incidence 1/2500-4500 live births
○ Survival is improving with improving neonatal care
● ● Classification of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula
○ Type A, isolated esophageal atresia.
○ Type B, blind-ending lower esophageal pouch with a fistula
between the trachea (proximal tracheoesophageal fistula) and the
upper esophageal pouch (distal atresia) .
○ Type C, esophageal atresia with a blind proximal esophageal pouch
and a distal tracheoesophageal fistula .
○ Type D, esophageal atresia with two fistulas between the trachea
and the lower and upper esophageal pouches (proximal and distal
fistulas).
○ Type E, fistula between the esophagus and the trachea without
atresia (H-type).
○ F Congenital esophageal stenosis.
● What are the swallowing disorders?
Achalasia
GERD
Ectopia
Esophageal stenosis
….
● Describe esophageal varices
Venous blood from the gastrointestinal tract (GI) is transported to the
liver via the portal vein before reaching the inferior vena cava. his route
allows the material absorbed from the intestine to be transported to
the liver before entering systemic circulation. Diseases like cirrhosis
may obstruct this flow and cause portal hypertension. Sub-epithelial
longitudinal veins might enlarge to form esophageal varices. With
increasing size and with rising intravascular pressure, they are more
likely to rupture resulting in esophageal bleeding
● describe gastritis in general
○ Gastritis is an inflammation of the gastric mucosa.
○ It can be acute or chronic.
○ Etiology is multifactorial
○ Symptoms are more severe in patients with the acute form than in
patients with the chronic one where it could be totally
asymptomatic.
◆ They vary from mild dyspepsia to massive hemorrhage.
◆ nausea, vomit
◆ heart burn
◆ halitosis
◆ frequent belching
● main characteristics of acute gastritis
○ it is an acute inflammation of the stomach mucosa
○ complications: necrosis and hemorrhage
○ possible causes and risk factors:
◆ NSAIDs (main)
◇ inhibit prostaglandin production, reducing the resistance of
the mucosa to acid environment
◇ aspirin promotes accumulation of protons (H+) in the lumen
and H+ stimulate histamine release which in turn stimulates
HCl acid secretion
◆ smoking
◆ alcohol
◆ chemotherapy (reduce ability to heal from erosions)
◆ ingestion of corrosive substances (aliphatic acids)
◆ bile (?)
◆ H. pylori infection (which tends to turn into chronic)
● main characteristics of chronic gastritis
○ Chronic inflammation of the gastric mucosa
○ often associated with small intestine inflammation
○ Classification based on the histopathological wall features: -
localization and depth of lesions - type of infiltrating inflammatory
cells:
◆ Specific Bacterial infection, e.g. Helicobacter spp.
(Helicobacter felis, H. heilmannii, H. pylori)
◆ Non-specific types of chronic gastritis
◇ Lymphoplasmacytic gastritis (diffuse infiltration of
lymphocytes and plasma cells into the lamina propria of the
stomach resulting in diffuse mucosal inflammation)
◇ Eosinophilic gastritis (a rare disorder, usually in children
or young adults, characterized by eosinophilic infiltration,
which also involves esophagus or duodenum)
◇ ◇ Granulomatous gastritis (granuloma surrounded by dense
infiltrates of inflammatory cells; more than half are
associated with Crohn's disease)
● describe peptic ulcers
○ PU is an acid-induced lesion that affects the mucosa, the
submucosa and sometimes muscularis mucosae. It can be gastric
or duodenal.
○ There is tissue necrosis accompanied by inflammation, formation
of granulation tissue with presence of fibrous reaction.
○ Main risk factors are those reducing or altering mucosal cell
defensive barrier (H. pylori infection, alcohol and tobacco
consumption, NSAIDs).
○ They are at risk for neoplastic transformation
● about H. pylori
○ H. pylori; colonises the gastric mucosa of 50% of the human
population
○ main cause of chronic gastritis and peptic ulcer disease
○ two major virulence factors are:
◆ cytotoxin-associated gene A (CagA)
◇ inducing host cell morphological changes by activating
tyrosine kinases and subsequent pro-inflammatory and
mitogenic responses.
◇ Bacterial strains with the cagA gene are associated with the
ability to cause ulcers, MALT lymphomas, and gastric
cancer
◆ vacuolizing cytotoxin-associated protein A (VacA)
◇ inducing vacuolization with formation of membrane
channels, cytochrome c release from mitochondria with
apoptosis activation. It is associated with precancerous
gastric lesions and progression to malignant phenotype.
○ H.Pylori produces urease that hydrolyzes urea into CO2 and
ammonia, thus creating a basic environment around the bacterial
colony, but increasing the acidic pH of the stomach.
○ Diagnosis:
◆ Urea Breath test (UBT)
1. Patient swallows test capsules containing urea tagged with
radioactive carbon13 (13C-urea).
2. If the patient is infected with H. pylori, 13C-urea will be
cleaved, and the produced 13CO 2 is quickly absorbed
moving from the blood to the lungs.
3. 13CO 2 is exhaled in the breath.
1. The test is positive if the analysis of the patient's breath
reveals 13CO 2 presence (breathed 13CO 2 peaks within
15-20 minutes and declines thereafter).
◆ Serologic tests: IgG and IgA
◆ H. pylori stool antigen test
○ what can cause malabsorption syndromes?- defect
● what are the general causes (concept) of malabsorption syndromes?
○ reduction of the absorption area
○ alteration of transport mechanisms through the intestinal barrier
○ defective digestion of food
● Increased undigested or badly-digested substances can cause:
○ Intestinal water influx due to osmosis
○ enzymatic attack by bacteria (flora) → inflammation
● bowel obstruction (open)
○ Types
can happen in the small or large intestine. They can be functional
or mechanical
They can also be classified in partial, complete or closed loop.
the causes can be intraluminal, intramural or external (in both LBO
and SBO)
○ Symptoms
Obstruction frequently causes abdominal pain, nausea, vomit,
alternate constipation/diarrhea. This, in turn, prevents the normal
movement of digested products.
○ Most common types
Most common of all are the small bowel obstructions (SBO)
Most common causes of SBO are external, in particular:
◆ post-surgical adhesions: fibrous tissue that forms between
organs and/or the peritoneal membrane. Can lead to necrosis.
◆ cancers
◆ hernias: weakness of abdominal wall, a piece of the intestine
“escapes” through
○ Most common causes of intraluminal obstruction of the small
bowel are bezoars and gallstones.
Most common cause of intramural obstruction, both for SBO and
LBO is Chron’s disease
Most common causes of LBO are ****
◆ adenocarcinoma
◆ diverticulitis
◆ volvulus: a loop of intestine twists around itself
○ what is intussuception
Intussusception (Invaginazione): due to an abnormal peristaltic
○ wave due to the presence of tumor masses or wide lesions.
● what is IBS?
It is a functional GI disorder,(disorder of gut–brain interaction), that
● causes chronic intermittent abdominal pain associated with diarrhea,
constipation, or both. it is characterized by
○ Altered gut immune activation
○ Increased intestinal permeability
○ Intestinal microbiota changes
○ Visceral hypersensitivity
○ Altered brain-gut interaction associated with alterations in
autonomic nervous system output causing emotional changes
(alteration of hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis activity)
◆ associated to multiple comorbidities such as anxiety,
depression, and somatization.
● Inflammatory bowel diseases (USE THE BOOK)
These are the questions from general surgery
○ Crohn's disease : what is it? signs and symptoms?
◆ Crohn's disease is a granulomatous inflammation, it affects any
part of the small or large intestine, with ulcerations in the wall
and formation of fistulae and abscesses.
◇ Signs and symptoms:
mucous diarrhea
■
hematochezia
■
nutrient malabsorption
■
dehydration
■
abdominal pain
■
diarrhea
■
○ Ulcerative colitis: what is it? signs and symptoms?
◆ involves the terminal tract of the intestine: mainly rectum and
colon, it is mostly inflammatory and interests only mucosa and
submucosa layers of the intestine.
◇ Signs and symptoms:
mucous diarrhea
■
hematochezia (passage of fresh blood per anus)
■
nutrient malabsorption.
■
○ main difference between ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease
◦ ◦ULCERATIVE ◦CHRON’S
COLITIS DISEASE
◦LOCATION ◦Starts at the ◦can affect any
rectum and spreads to part of GIT, from
the colon mouth to the anus
◦DEPTH OF ◦mucosa ◦can involve the
INFLAMMATION mucosa, submucosa,
and even the deeper
layers.
◦DISTRIBUTION ◦continuous area ◦patches of
of the colon and inflammation with
rectum normal areas of tissue
in between
◦SYMPTOMS in ◦the diarrhea is ◦the diarrhea is
common: abdominal often more frequent associated with
pain, diarrhea, rectal and may contain blood abdominal pain,
bleeding, and weight and mucus. especially in the right
loss lower quadrant, due to
involvement of the
small intestine.
◦COMPLICATIONS ◦increased risk of ◦STRICTURE. Also
colon cancer more likely to cause
complications beyond
the digestive tract,
such as joint pain, skin
problems, eye
inflammation, and liver
involvement.
◦ ◦ULCERATIVE ◦CHRON’S
COLITIS DISEASE
◦LOCATION ◦Starts at the ◦can affect any
rectum and spreads to part of GIT, from
the colon mouth to the anus
◦DEPTH OF ◦mucosa ◦can involve the
INFLAMMATION mucosa, submucosa,
and even the deeper
layers.
◦DISTRIBUTION ◦continuous area ◦patches of
of the colon and inflammation with
rectum normal areas of tissue
in between
◦SYMPTOMS in ◦the diarrhea is ◦the diarrhea is
common: abdominal often more frequent associated with
pain, diarrhea, rectal and may contain blood abdominal pain,
bleeding, and weight and mucus. especially in the right
loss lower quadrant, due to
involvement of the
small intestine.
◦COMPLICATIONS ◦increased risk of ◦STRICTURE. Also
colon cancer more likely to cause
complications beyond
the digestive tract,
such as joint pain, skin
problems, eye
inflammation, and liver
involvement.
