Hemostasis
● what is hemostasis?
hemostasis is the blood clotting process that prevents excessive
hemorrhage after blood vessel damage.
● describe the sequence of events leading to hemostasis at the site of
vascular injury
1. Arteriolar vasoconstriction: is immediate and transient. Mediated
by neurogenic reflex, and augmented by *endothelin *****(EC-
secreted potent vasoconstrictor) and other similar factors.
2. Primary hemostasis: formation of primary platelet plug. The
damaged endothelium exposes subendothelial collagen and Van
Willebrand factor (vWF). Platelets bind via GpIb receptors to
vWF on exposed ECM and are activated (shape change + granule
content release). Platelets release secretory granules containing
(among other things) ADP, and Thromboxane A2 (TxA2) that
recruit additional platelets and induce platelet aggregation through
platelet GpIIb-IIIa receptor binding to fibrinogen.
3. Secondary hemostasis: The exposed subendothelial cells
(fibroblasts, SMCs) express a membrane-bound procoagulant
glycoprotein, Tissue Factor, which activates Factor VII. Factor VII
activation generates a coagulation cascade that culminates in the
formation of Thrombin. Thrombin has two roles: it is a potent
platelet activator, so it promotes additional platelet aggregation at
the site of injury, and it also cleaves fibrinogen into fibrin. Fibrin
creates a meshwork that stabilizes the clot.
4. Clot stabilization and resorption: the clot (platelets and
polymerized fibrin) contracts to become a solid, permanent clot. At
this point there is release from the regenerated endothelium of
thrombomodulin that blocks the coagulation cascade, and tissue
plasminogen activator (t-PA) that promote fibrinolysis and clot
dissolution.
● in general, what are the features of platelets that confer their
functions?
Platelets have
○ several glycoprotein receptors
○ a contractile cytoskeleton
○ alpha granules containing
◆ adhesion molecule P-selectin on the membranes of the
granules
◆ coagulation proteins including fibrinogen, coagulation factor
V, and vWF.
◆ ◆ protein factors involved in wound healing: fibronectin, platelet
factor 4, PDGF, TGF-beta.
○ dense (delta) granules containing
◆ ADP
◆ ATP
◆ Ca++
◆ serotonin
◆ epinephrine
● what intrinsic properties of platelets allow platelet adhesion?
○ interaction between membrane-bound Glycoprotein Ib (GpIb) in
platelets with Von Willebrand factor in the subendothelium (that
is in turn bound to collagen, so it acts as a bridge).
Deficiency in Von Willebrand causes Von Willebrand disease.
Deficiency in GpIb causes Bernard-Soulier syndrome. Both are
bleeding disorders.
○ direct binding to type I and IV collagen via Glycoprotein Ia / IIa
complex (GpIa/IIa)
● what allows platelet aggregation?
○ Aggregation is accomplished by GpIIb-IIIa receptors on
different platelets binding fibrinogen
○ This receptor is “activated” (it acquires high affinity for fibrinogen)
by the conformational change that takes place when the platelets
● are activated.
● what triggers platelet activation?
○ Platelet activation is trigger by (among other things) Thrombin
and ADP
◆ Thrombin activates platelets by activating GPCR called
protease-activated receptor-1 (PAR-1) by proteolytic
cleavage.
◇ Initial wave of aggregation is reversible (with the activation
of thrombin, the platelet plug will be irreversible)
◆ ADP binds P2Y(1) and P2Y(12) receptors (GPCRs) → platelet
recruitment
○ activated platelets produce Thromboxin A2 (TXA2) (generated
from prostaglandin H2) which is in turn a potent inducer of platelet
aggregation.
● what are the changes in platelets upon their activation?
○ Upon activation platelets:
◆ release of alpha and delta granules: Ca++, ADP (further platelet
activation), coagulation proteins, wound healing factors, etc.
◆ change their shape (thanks to their contractile cytoskeleton),
with that there’s
◇ conformational change of the membrane bound
◇ glycoprotein IIa/IIIb that increases its affinity for
fibrinogen
◇ translocation of phosphatidylserine to the outer membrane
surface that binds Ca++ and this serves as a nucleation
site for the assembly of coagulation factor complexes
● describe the coagulation cascade
it’s a series of Ca++ dependent reactions that activate coagulation
factors, and culminates in the formation of fibrin and consequently the
deposition of insoluble fibrin clot.
1. Platelet activation → negatively charged phospholipids to the
platelet surface and release of Factor V from alpha granules.
2. Factor V binds to phospholipids and acts as a cofactor for factor
Xa. Factor Xa converts Prothrombin → Thrombin. Thrombin
converts Fibrinogen → Fibrin clot.
3. The formation of factor Xa is the convergence point between two
possible pathways:
1. Intrinsic pathway: (AP→ 12→11→9+(8)→ 10) activated (by
platelets) factor XII activates factor XI which activates factor IX,
which in turn, with the help of activated cofactor VIII, activate
factor X.
2. Extrinsic pathway:
In vitro: (TF+ 7 → 10) Tissue factor acts as a cofactor in the
reaction where proteolytic enzyme (factor VIIa) activates factor
X.
In vivo: (7+ TF → 9+8 → 10) tissue factor and factor 7 first
activate factor IX, which then activates factor X with factor VIII
as a cofactor.
3.
● describe the functions of Thrombin
○ stimulates platelet recruitment and degranulation (aggregation
and activation)
○ participates in the generation of cross-linked fibrin:
◆ fibrinogen (soluble) → fibrin monomers
◆ activates factor XIII that covalently cross-links fibrin
○ amplifies coagulation cascade by activating several factors (XI,
V, VIII, XIII)
○ it activates protease-activated receptors (PARs) expressed on
many cells, contributing to ****
◆ in platelets: TxA2 production → platelet aggregation
◆ in ECs: expression of adhesion molecules and a variety of
fibrinolytic (tPA), vasoactive (NO, PGI2), and cytokine
mediators (PDGF)
◇ tissue repair and angiogenesis
◆ leukocytes: activation
○ Anticoagulant effects: it can acts as anticoagulant preventing
clotting from extending beyond the site of the vascular injury
● describe the fibrinolytic cascade
Activation of the coagulation cascade also sets into motion a
fibrinolytic cascade (24h later) ****that activates Plasmin and as a
result it limits the size of the clot and contributes to its later
dissolution.
Plasmin breaks down fibrin, fibrinogen and some coagulation factors,
interferes with fibrin polymerization.
Plasminogen (found inside the clot) is hydrolyzed into PLASMIN by
○ Mainly t-PA (tissue plasminogen activator) secreted by ECs
○ urochinase, secreted by ECs
○ kallikrein (plasma enzymes) or factor XII-dependent pathway
(possibly explaining the link between factor XII deficiency and
thrombosis)
○ or by microorganism-derived proteins (streptokinase,
staphylokinase)
● After activation, plasmin is controlled by:
○ Plasminogen activator inhibitors (PAI): main inhibitor of tissue-
type plasminogen activator (tPA) and urokinase (uPA),
○ α2-plasmin inhibitor (plasma protein: binds and inhibits free
plasmin)
○ α2-macroglobulin (inhibits plasmin, kallikrein and thrombin)
○ and the immune response.
● what ensures the coagulation is confined to the site of injury?
Release of t-PA (fibrinolysis) and thrombomodulin (blocks coagulation
cascade) confine the hemostatic process to the site of injury.
● how does the endothelium prevent thrombosis and limit clotting to
sites of vascular damage?
Normal conditions, the ECs expresses factors that
○ inhibit platelet aggregation and activation:
◆ Prostacyclin (also called prostaglandin I2 or PGI2) It inhibits
platelet activation and is also an effective vasodilator.
◆ NO
◆ ADP
○ inhibit coagulation
◆ thrombomodulin
◆ endothelial protein C receptor
◆ heparin-like molecules (TF pathway inhibition)
◆ t-PA (fibrinolysis)
○ ECs also bing thrombin and alter its activity
● what sort of disorders arise from deranged hemostasis?
○ hemorrhagic disorders
○ thrombotic disorders
● describe defects of primary hemostasis
Defects of primary hemostasis are caused by platelet defects, vessel
defects or von Willebrand disease.They can be genetic or acquired.
○ impaired vasoconstriction
◆ degenerative → amyloidosis, elastosis
◆ vessel malformation
○ von Willebrand disease: most common blood clotting disorder
○ defects in platelet function
◆ Plateletosis: N°of platelets above 600,000/µl
(myeloproliferative syndromes. Platelets have functional and
morphological alterations.
○ thrombocytopenia low number of platelets below 100,000 (nv
150,000- 400,000/µL)
● describe defects of secondary hemostasis
○ hemophilias (genetic deficiency of coagulation factors)
○ defects in coagulation factor production
◆ hepatic diseases
◆ anticoagulant therapies (vit.K antagonists, heparin, etc)
○ excessive destruction (e.g. disseminated intravascular proteolysis)
○ defects in receptors (thrombin receptors)
○ others
● describe diseases of the fibrinolytic system
Components of the fibrinolytic system: plasminogen, plasminogen
activators, inhibitors of plasminogen activators, specific plasmin
inhibitors (alpha2-antiplasmin, alpha2- macroglobulin)
○ Genetic or acquired deficiency of plasmin inhibitors
(hyperfibrinolytic syndromes) → excessive fibrinolysis →
hemorrhage
○ Anti-protease deficiency (prevalence of venous thrombosis,
thromboembolism): Main antiproteases (control of proteases and
factors VIII, V, XII):
◆ alpha1-antitrypsin, alpha1-antichymotrypsin, antithrombin III,
protein C and S, C1 inactivator, protein C inhibitor
○ Genetic or acquired (liver diseases, carcinomas, leukemia, sickle
cell disease, hyperfibrinolytic syndromes, oral contraceptives)
deficiency of antithrombin III: recurrent venous thrombosis
