Nutritional Diseases
● what should an appropriate diet provide?
1. Sufficient energy, in the form of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins;
2. Amino acids and fatty acids to be used as building blocks for
synthesis of functional and structural proteins and lipids;
3. Vitamins and minerals, which function as coenzymes or
hormones in vital metabolic pathways or as important structural
components (Calcium).
● what are primary and secondary malnutrition?
○ Primary malnutrition: is insufficient intake of one or more of the
components an appropriate diet should have (sufficient calories,
sufficient proteins and fats, and sufficient vitamins and minerals)
○ Secondary malnutrition: nutrient intake is adequate, but
malnutrition is the result of malabsorption, impaired utilization or
storage, excess loss, or increased need for nutrients.
● what conditions may lead to primary malnutrition?
○ poverty
○ lack of education
○ anorexia/bulimia nervosa
○ chronic alcoholism
○ pharmacological therapies
○ advanced cancer
○ gastrointestinal pathologies
● what are the major diseases and conditions that lead to secondary
malnutrition?
secondary malnutrition often develops in chronically ill, elderly, and
bedridden patients. >50% of older residents in nursing homes in the
US are malnourished.
conditions that may lead to it:
○ Gastric resection → short bowel syndrome
○ IBD or other type of chronic inflammation of the intestinal mucosa
○ celiac disease
○ lactase deficiency
○ pancreatic insufficiency
○ liver and gallbladder disease → cholestasis
● what is SAM? main characteristics
Severe Acute Malnutrition:
Inadequate nutrient intake resulting in loss of fat and muscle tissue,
weight loss, lethargy, and generalized weakness.
○ in developed countries it is more common in the elderly and
debilitated patients
○ ○ in developing countries it affects children (up to 25%) and it is
associated with high death rates among the youngest
● How is malnutrition measured?
Malnutrition is determined in relation to the body Mass Index (BMI =
weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared). A BMI of
less than 16 kg/m2 is considered malnutrition (the normal range is
18.5 to 25 kg/m2).
BMI has its limitations (body builders have a BMI that is considered
obese)
Other useful parameters are the evaluation of:
○ fat reserves (thickness of skin folds),
○ muscle mass (reduced circumference of the central part of the
arm)
○ serum protein (the measurement of albumin and transferrin)
○ gut microbiome
● what are the two protein compartments in the body?
Two differentially regulated protein compartments in the body:
1) somatic compartment(proteins in skeletal muscles)
2) visceral compartment (protein stores in the visceral organs,
primarily the liver)
● Describe Marasmus
Marasmus is a severe type of malnutrition characterized by an overall
caloric deficiency (with or without protein deficiency)
Usually affects children in developing countries
Weight is 60% of normal weight for age and sex. (Low BMI)
There is growth retardation, anemia, severe fat loss, severe
sarcopenia, impaired immunity.
The somatic reserve of protein is almost completely depleted whereas
the visceral reserve is not completely depleted so serum albumin is
normal or slightly below normal
● Describe Kwashiorkor
Kwashiorkor is the most common SAM in African children.
It results from a severe protein deficiency that is relatively more
severe than the total calorie deficiency. It results from a diet that is
almost exclusive in carbohydrates.
The protein deficiency is so extreme that both the somatic and
visceral reserves of protein are depleted, causing severe
hypoalbuminemia that results in edema (ascites) so they have a
swollen stomach that “hides” the malnourished appearance.
Fat deposits are maintained, muscle atrophy is less marked (or visible,
probably because of glycogen) than in marasmus. Less severe forms
can be seen in individuals with chronic diarrheal states
● What are the effects of Marasmus and Kwashiorkor in the bone
marrow?
● There’s usually hypoplasia in the bone marrow.
This is due to a lack of nutrients for the synthesis of red and white
blood cells.
The peripheral blood commonly reveals mild to moderate anemia
Depending on the specific type of deficiency or the combination of
deficiencies (iron, folate, vitamin B12, protein, etc), the type of anemia
that is going to be present (normocytic, microcytic or macrocytic).
● What are the effects of Marasmus and Kwashiorkor in the brain?
The brain in infants who are born to malnourished mothers and who
suffer SAM during the first 1 or 2 years of life has been reported by
some to show cerebral atrophy, a reduced number of neurons, and
impaired myelinization of white matter.
● Define cachexia
SAM is a common complication in patients with AIDS or advanced
cancers → cachexia. Cachexia occurs in about 50% of cancer patients,
most commonly in individuals with gastrointestinal, pancreatic, and
lung cancers (responsible for about 30% of cancer deaths).
Highly debilitating condition characterized by:
1. Extreme weight loss
2. Fatigue
3. Muscle atrophy (Mortality is generally the consequence of atrophy
of the diaphragm)
4. Anemia
5. Anorexia
6. Edema.
● It is a result of a combination of factors including:
1. Energy waste through the use of metabolically inefficient pathways
(anaerobic metabolism and cori cycle)
2. Anorexia due to
◆ Endocrine imbalance
◆ Cytokines
◆ Psychological factors (depression, stress)
◆ Taste disruptions
3. tumor-induced gastrointestinal dysfunction (decreased peristalsis,
decreased digestive secretions, delayed digestion and assimilation
of nutrients)
4. proteolysis due to activation of NFkB and transcription of muscle-
specific ubiquitin ligase
5.
● describe vitamin A function and deficiency
Vitamin A is a fat soluble vitamin absorbed as preformed VitA from
animal products or as carotenes from vegetal sources, which are then
converted into the active vitamin (retinol). Main functions:
1. Maintenance of normal vision (trans retinal in rhodopsin)
2. Cell growth and mainteinance of the differentiation of epithelial
cells (important in the differentiation of the muco-secreting
epithelium)
3. Metabolic effects (e.g. drug metabolism, fatty acids…)
4. Stimulation of the immune system
5. Photoprotection
6. Antioxidant
● Deficiency may be casued by undernutrition or fat malabsorption.
Consequences of deficiency (symptoms) are:
○ impaired vision esp. at night
○ epithelial metaplasia and keratinization
◆ respiratory tract, urinary tract, skin..
◆ Eye: squamous metaplasia of the epithelium of the conjunctiva
and lacrimal ducts → xeroftalmia (dry eye) → Bitot spots
(keratin spots) → keratomalacia (cornea erosion that may lead
to blindness)
● describe the main steps of vitamin D metabolism
1. The skin synthesizes 90% of vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) from 7-
dehydrocholesterol in a reaction that requires UVB. There are
dietary sources of cholecalciferol that account for around 10% of
our normal intake (milk products and fish)
2. Vit D3 binds DBP (D binding protein) and is taken to the liver
3. In the liver cholecalciferol is converted to a more active form 25-
hydroxycholecalciferol (25-OH-D) by 25-hydrolases (CYP27A1,
and other CYPs)
4. in the kidneys 20-OH-D is converted to the most active form of the
● vitamin: 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D by a 1-alpha-hydrolase.
● what are the functions of vitamin D?
Main functions of vitamin D:
○ Maintains adequate plasma levels of calcium and phosphorus:
◆ Stimulation of intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphorus
◆ Stimulation of calcium reabsorption in the kidney
◆ Induces Osteoclast maturation (osteoclasts dissolve bone and
release calcium and phosphorus into the circulation) → Key role
of parathyroid glands → ↑PTH
○ Bone mineralization
○ Antimicrobial effects
○ Involved in proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and
angiogenesis
● Describe vitamin D deficiency
normal levels in the blood: 20-100 ng/ml; deficit <20ng/ml Causes:
○ Limited exposure to sunlight
○ Dietary deficiencies
○ Kidney or liver disorders, malabsorption…
○ Aging, genetic osteoporosis
● → Consequences of VitD deficiency are hypocalcemia and
hypophosphatemia that lead to low bone mineralization.
In growing children whose epiphyses have not closed, this leads to
Rickets:
Inadequate calcification leads to excessive growth of the epiphyseal
cartilage → microfractures → skeletal deformation (arching of the
legs). Square shape of the head due to flattening of the occipital
bones and deformation of the parietal ones. Anterior protrusion of the
sternum (pigeon breast deformity).
In Adults, Osteomalacia: defective bone remodeling that increases
risk for fractures especially in vertebrae and femur.
More rarely, there can be hypocalcemic tetany:
Convulsive state caused by an insufficient extracellular concentration
of ionized calcium, which is required for normal neural excitation and
the relaxation of muscles.
● Describe the function of vitamin C
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) is water soluble, obtained entirely from diet.
It’s main functions:
○ is a cofactor for enzymes that hydroxylate procollagen into
collagen and participate in wound healing
○ Antioxidant properties
○ Facilitates intestinal absorption of iron
● describe vitamin C deficiency
The main consequence is impaired collagen formation which results in
bleeding easily, and impaired wound healing. Inadequately
hydroxylated procollagen cannot acquire a stable helical configuration,
so it is poorly secreted from the fibroblast.
Effects:
It affects particularly blood vessels → predisposition to hemorrhages
and poor wound healing.. Loss of teeth and gums. In children:
insufficient growth and abnormal development of collagen-containing
structures (teeth, bones and blood vessels). Inability to contain
infections. Iron deficiency anemia
Cause: inadequate diet. It was common between sailors between 16th
and 18th century (>2 million died)
● what is the role of vitamin B12?
Vitamin B12 is a water-soluble vitamin required for the development,
myelination, and function of the central nervous system; healthy red
blood cell formation; and DNA synthesis.
Methylcobalamin (metabolically active form of vitamin B12) is an
essential cofactor in the conversion of homocysteine to methionine
● by the enzyme methionine synthase: methylcobalamin yields a
methyl group that is recovered from N5-methyltetrahydrofolic acid, the
principal form of folic acid in plasma, which is converted to
tetrahydrofolic acid (FH4).
In that cycle it is helping to form FH4 and methionine.
FH4 is required for the conversion of deoxy-uridine monophosphate
(dUMP) to deoxythymidine monophosphate (dTMP), a building block
● for DNA.
● how is vitamin B12 absorbed?
Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) is taken up with the diet (foods of animal
origin) and synthesized by the intestinal flora (daily requirement is 2 to
3 µg). Absorption occurs in the terminal ileum, where the receptors for
the vitamin B12 / IF complex are expressed (cubilin). Vitamin B12 is
freed from binding proteins (in food) through the action of pepsin in
the stomach and binds to a salivary protein called haptocorrin. In the
duodenum, bound vitamin B12 is released from haptocorrin by the
action of pancreatic proteases and it associates with intrinsic factor
(F1), produced by the parietal cells of the fundic mucosa. In the blood
the vitamin B12 is transported by a group of proteins
(transcobalamin)
● describe vitamin B12 deficiency
○ Ineffective hematopoioesis: Deficit in folic acid or vitamin B12
causes altered DNA synthesis: delayed nuclear maturation, normal
cytoplasmic and hemoglobin → nuclear to cytoplasm asynchrony.
DNA defects trigger apoptosis of precursors inside the marrow
leading to pancytopenia (low levels of red blood cells, white blood
cells and platelets) Formation of large erythroid precursors
(megaloblasts) in the bone marrow
○ The erythrocytes that manage to leave the marrow are typically
macrocytic.
○ Vitamin B12 deficiency in most cases is secondary to lack of
intrinsic factor (F1).
◆ PERNICIOUS ANEMIA: Autoimmune disease, characterized by
the presence of auto-Ab that attack on the gastric mucosa
(anti-parietal cells or anti-F1 or anti-ileal receptor).
● what are the 3 different types of adverse reactions to food?
1. TOXIC (INTOXICATIONS)
2. NON TOXIC
1. DUE TO ALTERED IMMUNE RESPONSE (ALLERGIES)
1. IgE dependent
2. non IgE dependent
2. NOT OF IMMUNOLOGIC ORIGIN (INTOLERANCES)
1. of enzymatic type
2. of pharmacologic type
3. induced by food additives
● describe intoxications
There is not any distinction among individuals so the toxin hit all of us.
There are different types of toxins: from funghi like Amanita
phalloides, Amanita verna, Amanita virosa which may be fatal;
Inadequate food storage can allow the growth of dangerous
microorganisms (contaminants) e.g. aspergillus which produces
aflatoxins.
Chronic consumption of these contaminats is carcinogenic.
More common and frequent are intoxications because of Clostridium
Botulinum, Staphylococcus Aureus and Salmonella Typhi.
● what are the food allergies?
Food allergies can be IgE mediated and non-IgE mediated.
○ The symptoms in IgE mediated allergies appear within minutes to
hours. The reaction is fast, acute, sometimes very strong as in the
case of anaphylaxis.
○ Allergies not mediated by IgE, but still mediated by improper
reaction of the innate immunity, show a late onset of symptoms.
○ there is an increasing number of conditions characterized by both
IgE and non IgE mediated symptoms that appear fast and last for
hours or days.
● describe IgE-mediated food allergy
Type I hypersensitivities include atopic diseases, which are an
exaggerated IgE mediated immune responses (i.e., allergic: asthma,
rhinitis, conjunctivitis, and dermatitis), and allergic diseases, which are
immune responses to foreign allergens (i.e., anaphylaxis, urticaria,
angioedema, food, and drug allergies). The allergens that result in a
type I hypersensitivity may be harmless (i.e., pollen, mites, or foods,
drugs, etc.) or more hazardous such as insect venoms. The reaction
may be manifested in different areas of the body and may result in
instances such as:
○ Nasal allergic rhinitis or hay fever
○ Ocular allergic conjunctivitis, potentially due to seasonal allergens
such as pollen or mold spores
○ Dermatological hives, atopic eczema, or erythema
○ Soft tissue angioedema
○ Pulmonary reactions, such as allergic asthma or hypoxia
○ Systemic reaction, which is a life-threatening medical emergency,
and also known as anaphylaxis.
○ There are common environmental allergens that are known to be
trigger excessive formation of IgE antibodies in some individuals:
e.g. pollen, moulds, mites, foods (eggs, crustaceans, fish, fruit),
○ etc. Having a hypersensitivity reaction to these common
environmental allergens is also an important risk factor for the
development of allergic diseases (IgE mediated): rhinitis, asthma,
atopic eczema, etc.
○ The risk of developing food allergy can depend on several factors:
◆ Hereditary predisposition to express hypersensitivity to foods
with a high protein content (mainly of plant origin); over time
these individuals may develop other allergic pathologies (atopic
rhinitis, bronchial asthma)
◆ Increased intestinal mucosal permeability (physiological in
childhood, pathological due to inflammatory processes or
malnutrition) can favor the penetration of antigens and their
presentation to lymphocytes
◆ Allergen concentration
◆ Environmental factors (cigarette smoke, physical stress, cold
temperatures)
● describe the sequence of events in immediate (type 1) hypersensitivity
allergens start the first phase of sensitization of cells, in particular
mastocytes and basophils that start expressing on the surface IgE and
it is only the second encounter with the same or similar allergen
because of the reaction of IgE on the surface of the cell, there is a
massive, acute release of inflammatory mediators like histamine and
prostaglandins that cause the allergic reaction which leads to local
and systemic symptoms in particular conjunctivitis, nasal allergy,
asthma, urticaria.
● describe non IgE mediated allergies (type 2 hypersensitivities)
non IgE mediated allergies:
There is involvement of innate immunity, as well as the adaptive
immunity, in particular Th2 cells. (Th1 is mainly leading to activation of
cytotoxic T cells response while Th2 response, typical of allergies, is
producing antibodies.)
○ Food protein induced Enteropathies: Food-Protein-Induced
Enterocolitis Syndrome (FPIES), Food-Protein-Induced Allergic
Proctocolitis (FPIAP), Food Protein Enteropthy (FPE) ****they
occur very early in the childhood and are characterized by
abnormal innate immune responses to some protein content of a
given food.
○ Eosinophilic GI disorders: esophagitis, gastritis, enterocolitis.
Mixed condition in which IgE is present as well.
○ Celiac Disease
● describe celiac disease
○ what it is: Non IgE-dependent Immune-mediated disorder
triggered by the ingestion of gluten containing foods such as
wheat, rye, or barley in genetically predisposed individuals →
intestinal villous atrophy.
○ Symptoms:
◆ vary and may include digestive problems, anemia, skin rash,
and joint and bone pain.
◆ It may also be asymptomatic or present with atypical symptoms
and escape diagnosis for a long time
◇ anemia due to chronic iron and vitamin malabsorption.
Silent celiac disease (positive serology and villous
■
atrophy without symptoms);
latent celiac disease (positive serology is not
■
accompanied by villous atrophy).
○ Epidemiology:
◆ Incidence: 1/100-1/150
◆ In adults, most commonly between the ages of 30 and 60.
◆ Possible association with other autoimmune diseases (systemic
lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis)
○ Treatment: gluten-free diet.
○ Morphology:
◆ increased numbers of intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs)
◆ epithelial proliferation with crypt elongation.
◆ villous atrophy
○ Diagnosis:
◆ endoscopy and biopsy → altered small intestine mucosa,
sometimes lymphocytic infiltration (1st degree of CD) or
already damaged villi.
◆ Serum Ab: IgA anti-Transglutaminase, IgG anti-
Transglutaminase, IgA anti-endomisium.
● Describe the physic pathology of celiac disease
Gluten is digested into amino acids and peptides, including a 33-a.a.
-gliadin, a peptide that is resistant to degradation by gastric,
 
pancreatic, and small intestine proteases. ❖ Indigestible fragments of
gluten induce enterocytes to release the zonulin which loosens tight
junctions. ❖ Gliadin crosses the intestinal lining and accumulate under
the enterocytes. ❖ Gliadin induces enterocytes to secrete IL-15, which
in turn triggers activation and proliferation of CD8+ intraepithelial
lymphocytes (IELs). ❖ IELs express NKG2D, a natural killer marker and
receptor for MIC-A. Enterocytes that have been induced to express
surface MIC-A in response to stress are then attacked. The resulting
epithelial damage enhance the passage of other gliadin peptides into
the lamina propria where they are deamidated by tissue
transglutaminase (tTG), an enzyme released by the damaged cells. ❖
The deamidated gliadin interacts with HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 on
antigen presenting cells (APC) and in turn stimulates CD4+ T cells to
produce cytokines that exacerbate tissue damage. ❖ B cells release
● antibody molecules targeted to gluten and TTG. Those antibodies
might cause further damage when they hit their targets on near
enterocytes.
● describe food intolerances of enzymatic type
The most notable one is lactose intolerance, caused by a deficiency in
the enzyme lactase (a hydrolase) that hydrolyzes the beta 1,4
glycosidic bond between glucose and galactose in lactose.
Diagnosed early in life but can also occur in adults (one third of adults
have reduced lactase activity).
As a result,
○ lactose remains in the gut and being osmotically active it draws in
excess water → diarrhea
○ the enterocytes cannot absorb the sugar and it is instead
fermented by gut bacteria → gas, bloating and intestinal pain.
● Describe food intolerances of pharmacological type
result from pharmacological effects of vasoactive amines present in
foods.
Histamine , tyramine, putrescine, spermine, spermidine, and
cadaverine, are compounds formed during microbial fermentation of
certain foods so they naturally contain high levels of biogenic amines.
These include: cheeses (especially ripe cheeses– “cheese-reaction”),
wine, kefir, dry sausage, fermented meats, sauerkraut, mushrooms,
miso and soy sauce, chocolate and yeast (see links at bottom of
page).
Sensitivity to histamine varies widely between individuals. Normally
biogenic amines are rapidly broken down by enzymes. Some drugs
inhibit the action of the enzymes. These include some antibiotics and
antidepressants (monoamine oxidase inhibitors). Other drugs promote
histamine release from immune cells, including some opioids, muscle
relaxants, x-ray contrast media, as well as alcohol.
Ingestion of TYRAMINE (E and NE precursor)with food should be
limited to a minimum when taking MAO inhibitors due to risk of severe
arterial hypertension
Symptoms can be a burning or itching sensation in the mouth, nausea,
vomiting, flushing, skin rash or hives, itching, diarrhea, headache,
blood pressure changes (both high or low possible), dizziness,
problems with concentration, “mental fog” and fainting. The usual
onset of symptoms is within a few minutes after ingestion of the
offending food. Some cases of asthma may be attributable to
histamine intolerance.
The duration of symptom ranges from a few hours to 24 h.
Normally no specific treatment is required, as symptoms subside
spontaneously.
“They’re re very frequent.
1. Foods containing vasoactive amines: Foods containing high
amounts of vasoactive amines, for instance fermented cheese, milk
as well, may cause a reaction similar to that occurring in allergies.
The difference in the reactions between people is in the ability to
eliminate vasoactive amines. There can also be single episodes
of apparent intolerances when consuming these foods excessively:
in this case it is an episode, the person is not intolerant if this
doesn’t happen every time they consume these foods.
2. Foods that cause degranulation of mastocytes: pseudoallergic
condition (without antibodies). These are difficult to diagnose.
3. foods that maintain levels of histamine and serotonin higher
because they are inhibitors of their normal catabolism (natural
MAO inhibitors and diamine oxidase inhibitors)
● Often the situation is complex so you have bigger content of
vasoactive amines and also presence of inhibitors of amine catabolism
and eventually in the case of histamine and serotonin, the catabolism
leads to the production of imidazole acetate that means that aldehyde
dehydrogenase is important. So the best competitive inhibitor of
diamine oxidase or monoamine oxidase, meaning a good substrate for
aldehyde dehydrogenase is alcohol. If I eat food rich in histamine and I
drink alcohol, I impair the histamine removal and I keep the histamine
levels high.
● Describe intolerances to food additives
sulphites (present in wine, they are stressors of gastric mucosa),
sodium benzoate (probably it causes impairment of vasoactive amines
catabolism). Glutamate is still considered as a possible cause of food
intolerance but it is still debated.
