08.05.2023 POLI
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF AGING AND FRAILTY
Fig. 1 shows the different phenotypes of aging. Aging is
not a disease, but rather a physiological process. Of
course, we must distinguish between premature aging and
healthy and successful aging.
Starting from a few statistical data (fig. 2), concerning the
number of people reaching and overtaking 65 years of age,
it’s possible to see the comparison, in this very important
table, made by the United Nations department of
fig.1
economic and social affairs, between two main years,
2019 and 2050. The estimated increase in the number of people aged 65 years and over has been depicted in the
third column. In Asia, Northern Africa and Sub-Saharan Africa the expected percentage increase in the elderly
population is quite amazing: over 200%. We already know that Asia will overcome the other countries. You can spot
the data concerning Europe and Northern America, where the increase in about 30 years is expected to be some,
but not much (less than 50% of the present elderly population).
fig.2
Concerning Italy in particular, we may use as a reference the data provided by the European Political Cooperation
in 2018 about the life expectancy at birth (fig. 3): as we can see, the mean life expectancy is different in males and
females, because the ladies have a greater life expectancy (more or less 5 years more). This is still true for the life
expectancy at 65 years old. Of course, the numbers are reduced, but the overall numbers are the ones I just
mentioned: 82.5 for males and 86.9 for females. The important thing is not the average life expectancy, which is
increasing, but the point is the quality. Different subgroups of people in different regions of the world can face social
and economical problems. We should do our best to improve the quality of our life. Aging in a successful way is the
only way to go on living. These data are solid, so they can give us an overall picture of the whole story. So, we must
pay attention to these data, in order to plan a number of actions from the socio-economic and sanitary point of
views.
Eleonora Deinite
42
08.05.2023 POLI
fig.3
What is aging? AGING = the physiological process characterized by the progressive and continuous loss of function
of cells, tissues, organs and systems with time.
Aging is influenced by genetics but especially by the environment. Physiological, pathological and environmental
factors can affect our personal way to age.
Aging is a:
● multifactorial condition, as health (we need different factors to be and remain healthy) and many diseases: the
main human diseases are non-communicable diseases (namely, most diseases except for infections, such as
cardiovascular diseases, most cancers, gastro-intestinal diseases, respiratory diseases, etc. i.e. all those diseases
that can’t be contagious). In these diseases, many factors contribute to pathogenesis. It may seem a stupid
thing, but in reality it is very important, especially as physicians: when we are facing a non-communicable
disease in a patient, we must be aware that many factors can cause it. I have to consider the different factors
actually present in that particular patient.
● multi-step process. There is not a single step: for example, you don’t suddenly have diabetes: you have first
hyperglycemia, then the symptomatic disease, finally eventual complications. In the same way, we don’t age all
of a sudden.
Multi-factorial and multi-step processes characterize both health and aging.
There are many theories on the reason why people age, because there are many different factors to include (fig. 4).
The funnel gives you the idea of the multistep and multifactorial progressive process of aging, where different
factors get in, not necessarily at the same time (rarely they are simultaneous).
Eleonora Deinite
43
08.05.2023 POLI
fig.4
In the progress of aging, familiarity (inherited
conditions) plays a role, but often familiarity
is overwhelmed by many other factors. In the
past, hereditary factors played a much larger
role, while nowadays the progeny of those
who died prematurely of heart attack (due to
inherited cardiovascular diseases
predisposition) can reach up to 70-80 years of
age, despite having inherited the same
genetic factors that killed their parents. This is
due to a change in the environment, modern
medicine and improved healthcare systems,
which made a difference. So, familiarity is
important, but it is not all. If in the family of a
patient there is the predisposition for
diabetes, it’s not said that the patient will develop diabetes, it depends on them, because, although they have
familiarity, they can avoid all the other factors that can cause diabetes.
For example, during WWII, “diabetes didn't exist”, because people couldn't eat properly.
The other factors can be:
● environment, as in the case of pollution
● radiation
● smoking
● nutrition
Due to these factors, we have eventually altered proteins. To have altered proteins, we need to modify the genes
through mutations induced by the environment and epigenetic changes. So, the enzymes and the structural
proteins that make up cells, tissues and organs do not work properly. So, there is a progressive alteration of
structure and function of cells, tissues and organs. We have an increase in cell death, tissue damage, repair,
inflammation (which is an incredibly strong tool to make a disease progress).
General pathology (which should be called “environmental pathology”) doesn't focus on a single disease or a single
class of diseases but, given a certain disease, it analyzes from the very beginning the causes, the development, the
expression and the complications of the disease. So, the whole story of the disease is important. If you look in this
way at a given disease, you have an overall idea of the disease: you can understand what each step means, what
multifactorial means and so on.
There are also other aspects that contribute to the progression of aging:
● mitochondrial dysfunction
● oxidative stress
● depletion of staminal cells
● cellular senescence
! Aging and senescence are not synonyms. They are close, but they are not the same thing.
● altered intercellular communication
● altered efficacy of nutrients
Altogether these factors, possibly in a synergistic way, amplify the pathology and eventually affect aging, which is
Eleonora Deinite
44
08.05.2023 POLI
normal, but can be either better or worse aging.
In case of worse aging, the "pre-room" is called frailty.
Why do people age? There are many theories, and no single theory adequately explains the aging progress:
● Hereditary factors
● Loss of cellular mass and ability of cells to divide and replicate
● Accumulation of waste materials that clog cells and cause them to die
● Changes in structure of connective tissue
● Oxidative stress
Physical changes related to “normal” aging are not a disease and occur in most body systems, including:
S
ENSORY SYSTEM
● Loss of some of the features of vision
○ acuity → cataracts, macular degeneration
○ accommodation → presbyopia (physiological insufficiency of accommodation associated with the aging
of the eye that results in progressively worsening ability to focus clearly on close objects)
○ peripheral vision → glaucoma = pattern of diseases due to changes in the optic nerve, which is typical
in elderly people and causes the partial or complete loss of vision (blindness), especially of peripheral
vision
○ dark adaptation
○ contrast sensitivity
● Auditory and vestibular apparati
○ Presbycusis (or age-related hearing loss) = cumulative effect of aging on hearing → high frequency
hearing loss
○ vestibular dysfunction
● Oral/dental apparatus
○ 40% of elderly are edentulous (= having no teeth)
○ alteration in taste and salivary function
C
ENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
● There are people reaching 80 years of age that have fantastic brains, but after this age the number of
neurodegenerations increases significantly, although many people over 80 years of age still drive.
● Maybe we can significantly notice a slower development and activation of the different aspects of intelligence
due to increased “lag” time of neurons transmitting information (slowing manifests itself in the learning
process). Unfamiliar or high stress activities cause an older person to perform more slowly. So, we have a
gradual reduction of functions, so you need more time to get fit on intellectual activities, but eventually you do
them.
● The memory is good, but maybe the activity of the memory is lower, so you need more time to memorize things,
but eventually you memorize perfectly. In particular, due to the stored memory, if you are lucky enough to not
get a neurodegeneration, you can even get a better performance, because of the experience you stored that
helps you (problem solving skill increases with age), but you need time.
● It’s important to minimize distractions, because older people lose the ability to perform multitasking activities,
although they can still perform monotasking activities one by one.
● “Use it or lose it”
Eleonora Deinite
45
08.05.2023 POLI
M
USCLES AND BONES
● The reduction of muscle mass, function and strength is normal if it is moderate (below 20-30%), otherwise, if
you get an exaggerated (not normal and consequently pathological) reduction of muscle, you get into
sarcopenia (from the Greek, “loss of flesh, meat, muscle”) = depletion of muscle mass (there is a 30% loss in
muscle mass from 3rd to 8th decade).
● The ladies, after menopause, could suffer a significant reduction in bone mass and density. The bones lose
calcium and other minerals.
● Osteoarthritis = a type of degenerative joint disease that results from breakdown of joint cartilage and
underlying bone.
● There are many ways to keep the muscles fit, to keep a good density of the bones, especially appropriate
physical exercise at appropriate times, diet and adequate rest.
D
IGESTIVE SYSTEM
● Heart/circulatory system
● It is less fit and less efficient in time:
○ Age changes make the heart less able to pump efficiently
○ Less blood pumped results in lowered blood oxygen levels
○ Blood vessels lose elasticity with age so heart has to pump harder to circulate blood
● There are many reasons: the main reason is atherosclerosis, that you already know, since you studied
atherogenesis (the mechanism of formation of atherosclerosis).
● The vascular changes include:
○ loss of the elastic fibers in the arterial vessel walls
○ increase in the number of connective fibers
○ decrease in the number of vascular smooth muscles → the vascular smooth muscle cells are "convinced"
by different molecules, usually pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrogenic molecules, to change their
phenotype to become fibroblast-like cells.
○ increased thickness of intima and media → the arterial vessel wall increases in size and protrudes in the
direction of the lumen
○ collagen deposition, increased fibronectin, cross linking (AGEs), fragmentation of elastin and calcium
deposition in the matrix
○ The net result is increased vascular stiffness.
R
ESPIRATORY SYSTEM
● The blood oxygenation of an elder person is often a lot, but it is less efficient, because there is less oxygen in
the blood per unit of time.
● The amount of oxygen delivered to the bloodstream and the rate of blood flow decline with age.
● Even with the lung capacity remaining normal, the lung tissues seem to lose facility for making the oxygen-to-
blood transfer.
● Since older people can not breath as fast, there is less oxygen entering the blood per minute.
R
ENAL SYSTEM
• The glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is a parameter evaluated in a standard blood analysis you can ask for your
patients.
! This rate is normally decreasing a bit within a moderate range:
Eleonora Deinite
46
08.05.2023 POLI
Age (years) Average estimated GFR (ml/min)
20-29 116
30-39 107
40-49 99
50-59 93
60-69 85
70+ 75
G
ASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
• “For many years I was able to digest stones”, but as the time goes by the situation is gradually changing, because
there is a decrease in:
■ GI absorptive cells
■ GI motility
■ Sphincter activity
● There are people who never suffered from GERD (gastro-esophageal reflux disease) and now
they do, because the activity of the cardias sphincter activity is not as good as before. There are
also dietary and lifestyle conditions affecting the sphincter activity, not only the number of
years. It is a complex process.
■ GI blood flow
■ gastric acid secretion
■ active transport
! When you face a definite disease, keep your vision wide and open. At first, you must have a general idea of
the individual and then you can focus on the particular disease.
The age-associated factors can be more or less amplified in different people, since it depends on the number
and the synergistic activity of the factors occurring in that particular individual.
fig.5
Aging is not usually a disease, since we can also hope for a
healthy and successful aging, but aging could also be a disease,
so it can be worse than expected for many reasons.
Eleonora Deinite
47
08.05.2023 POLI
F
RAILTY
● is a precondition of bad aging (aging as a disease)
→ It is essential to recognise and, if possible, to prevent the progression of frailty
! Aging is a multi-step process
● is an age-related state of high vulnerability to adverse health outcomes after a stressor event, so is a
reduced healthy adaptation to stress
→ some people after a certain age are less able to adapt, because the adaptation mechanisms are lacking
and/or defective
● is characterized by a reduced capacity to compensate aging-related molecular and cellular damage
● predisposes the individuals to progressive decline in different functional domains
● contributes to the onset of geriatric syndromes
This cartoon (fig. 6) well describes the difference
between successful aging (healthy condition)
and bad aging, which can lead to frailty and to
disability.
Usually, they have the same pattern up to 75
years of age, but some people can have a
successful aging up to 80-95 years of age too (of
course, it is important to prevent and cure
neurodegenerative diseases to reach this goal).
But you can have frailty and disability well before
the expected 80 years of age.
fig.6
Frailty is a clinical syndrome now well
recognised by physicians that marks decreased physiologic
reserve and resilience. Frailty involves a vicious cycle culminating in disability and/or mortality.
A list of the main symptoms is present → a person is frail if they are showing some or all of the symptoms reported
in the list → substantial evidence that frailty is an independent, distinct, clinically recognizable entity.
S
YMPTOMS OF FRAILTY
There are different symptoms of frailty, depending on the confluence of two or more of these symptoms, you can
have a different degree (moderate, heavy frailty):
● sarcopenia
○ A frail person shows you first of all a sarcopenic condition, due to many different causes (fig. 7):
■ the primary cause of sarcopenia is aging
■ disease → inflammation in particular
■ inactivity → due to sedentary lifestyle, for example
■ malnutrition
● undernutrition
● overnutrition → sarcopenic obesity (it can be a secondary cause of sarcopenia) → the
obese people are often sarcopenic, becasue instead of having the development of
muscles, they develop fat
Eleonora Deinite
48
08.05.2023 POLI
fig.7
● inflammation
! It is the most important factor in disease progression. If you want to stop or decrease the
progression of any non-communicable diseases, you must stop inflammation.
● decreased heart rate variability
● altered clotting processes
● increased insulin resistance → increased glycemia
● anemia = a condition in which the number of red blood cells or the hemoglobin concentration within them is
lower than normal.
○ in thalassemia, you have very small red blood cells (microcytic anemia) and there is a higher number of
red blood cells → we normally have 4.35 to 5.65 million RBCs per microliter (µL) of blood for men and
3.92 to 5.13 million RBCs per µL of blood for women. Since the RBCs are smaller, there is less hemoglobin
in the blood, less oxygen to the tissue and so on.
○ To recognise an anemia, you must measure the hemoglobin content of blood by evaluating the
hematocrit (the ratio of the volume of red blood cells to the total volume of blood), because it’s important
to have a sufficient mass of RBCs (either smaller or bigger, it doesn’t count) that can convey in a minute
the right amount of oxygen in the periphery. In an anemic person, if you check the blood analysis, you
must look at the hemoglobin content first: the hemoglobin content is correct when it is 13.2 to 16.6
grams per deciliter for men, and 11.6 to 15 grams per deciliter for women. Hemoglobin level and
hematocrit are the two important parameters to check to see if you have a normal hematological
condition.
● altered hormones
○ There are endocrinological problems due to the decline of estrogen and testosterone levels with age
■ decrease in DHEAS (dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate), which is a steroid produced in the
adrenal gland and is a precursor of testosterone and estrogen
■ decrease in IGF1 (insulin-like growth factor 1)
■ decrease in cortisol
● micronutrient deficiencies
C
ONSEQUENCES OF FRAILTY
What are the consequences of the frail condition?
- disability and dependency
- slow and incomplete recovery from a given disease, like infections
→ they can hardly manage Sars-COV2, for example
- increase in the frequency of falls
Eleonora Deinite
49
08.05.2023 POLI
- increase in mortality
- adverse outcomes of hospitalization
C = INFLAMMAGING
HRONIC INFLAMMATION IN AGING
In frail people, usually serum plasma
markers of inflammation are statistically
increased (fig. 8): a typical serum marker of
inflammation, C-reactive protein (CPR), is
increased.
fig.8
Inflammation is a bad companion for aging and for cholesterol: without inflammation, cholesterol doesn't not
accumulate in the blood vessels; you need inflammation in the endothelial barrier, which can be caused by
hypertension, hyperglycemia, smoking etc. These factors make cholesterol aggressive because of inflammation,
because the endothelial barrier changes its phenotype from normal to inflammatory.
So, inflammaging is a strong risk factor for cardiovascular disease, cancer, chronic kidney disease, dementia etc.
For example, inflammation makes a difference in the cancerogenesis, starting from a single clone of neoplastic cells
to the actual symptomatic occurence of the disease. Cancerogenesis is a long story that does not necessarily end in
a bad way.
Inflammaging is a term invented by an Italian pathologist that is now used worldwide. Chronic inflammation makes
aging pathological and more complicated.
Inflammaging = a condition characterized by elevated levels of blood inflammatory markers in the serum and in the
brain that carries high susceptibility to chronic morbidity, disability, frailty, and premature death.
It has been proposed as a marker of
accelerated aging, but it is not only related to
aging (fig. 9). For example, if a patient has
diabetes mellitus, the symptoms of this
disease are hyperglycemia and, if
hyperglycemia is more than 180 mg/100 ml,
the loss of glucose in the urine (glycosuria).
These are the two main symptoms of
diabetes to make the lab analyses. But not all
diabetic people are at the same stage of the
disease: there are people with mild
fig.9
hyperglycemia, other people are blind, other
people suffer from heart attacks because of the diabetes… so, there are different steps of the disease (diabetes is
multistep and multifactorial). In the scheme, the cause leads to the disease (diabetes mellitus), which shows some
symptoms (like hyperglycemia) and can then reach the complete expression of the disease and the complications
(blindness, kidney failure, heart failure etc.).
Eleonora Deinite
50
08.05.2023 POLI
Inflammation has two main roles:
● it favors the action of the causes of the disease and promotes the occurrence of the disease → contribution to
the disease appearance (promotion)
● when inflammation becomes a sustained process, it becomes a factor of progression of the disease → the
disease is already present, but the inflammation further stimulates the disease → enhancement of disease
development (progression)
This difference is very important also in carcinogenesis:
● promotion → a small clone of neoplastic cells will be destroyed in 99,99% of the cases by our defenses, but if
there is an inflammatory process to improve and
stimulate the growth of this small clone, the latter
will grow and won’t be small anymore, so our
defenses will be overwhelmed.
● progression → if the disease is already present, for
example, you can have a metastasis, inflammation
can enhance the progression of the disease.
For this reason, prevention is very important: if I stop the
disease at the beginning is a whole different story than if
fig.10
I act when the disease has already progressed much.
M
ECHANISMS OF INFLAMMAGING
Inflammaging occurs through different mechanisms → Why does 1+1 not necessarily give 2 in this case? Because
not all mechanisms occur and not all mechanisms occur at the same time.
1. genetic susceptibility
→ Probably acquired factors rather than genetic predisposition are making the difference
Various data indicate that genetic variability affects the plasma levels of several inflammatory markers.
The cumulative effect of these genetic polymorphisms might be a risk factor for multimorbidity and frailty.
The single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) (fig. 10) are positions in the genome where the large majority of
individuals have for example an Adenine (A) while other subjects have a Guanine (G) or a Thymine (T). Not all
the single nucleotide changes are classified as SNPs, only those present in at least 1% of the population.
When we can have a different combination of different SNPs so that some people age more easily than others.
It is a problem of accumulation of SNPs.
2. central obesity = accumulation of excessive fat around stomach and abdomen
We have two types of adipose tissues:
● brown adipose tissue
○ all over the body, according to sexual differences,
○ subcutaneous localization,
○ is devoted prevalently to produce heat (caloric energy),
○ presence of adrenergic receptors on these adipocytes
● white adipose tissue
○ abdominal area (visceral and retroperitoneal areas)
○ sort of “endocrine system”
○ can produce inflammation and other bioactive
molecules fig.11
Eleonora Deinite
51
08.05.2023 POLI
→ it’s better to not accumulate white adipose tissue, especially with age
- in women, after menopause, since estrogen cannot limit anymore white adipose
tissue accumulation
- after 70 years of age, almost all men have a big abdomen
White adipose tissue can produce a lot of molecules, which are called altogether adipokines (fig. 12):
the scheme shows only the main ones, because probably we don’t even know all the molecules
produced by our central (white) adipose tissue. If a person has an excessive amount of white adipose
tissue, they are always producing these molecules. If you have any inflammatory process going on,
that process will be amplified by these molecules. This is the reason why obesity and overweight are
associated with all the diseases that can be stimulated (either promotion or progression) by
inflammation.
● pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-8 and IL-6)
● MCP-1 (macrophage chemotactic protein 1)
● TNF-ɑ
○ is a pro-inflammatory cytokines
○ stimulates insulin resistance, with the support of macrophages infiltrating in the
tissue, since macrophages produce resistin, which induces insulin resistance (this
causes hyperglycemia)
● PAI-1 (plasminogen activator inhibitor 1)
○ plasminogen activator produces plasmin (or fibrinolysin), which induces the lysis of
fibrin and, consequently, the lysis of blood clots
→ if you block the production of plasmin, you favor abnormal blood clotting and
thrombosis
● angiotensin
fig.12
○ favors artery
hypertension
● decrease in adiponectin
○ insulin resistance
Q: We said that white adipose tissue is
localized in visceral and retroperitoneal
areas, does it mean that it is not
subcutaneous? Because I know that we have
much less brown adipose tissue than white
adipose tissue, so isn’t white adipose tissue
also subcutaneous?
A: The endocrine adipose tissue is localized
only in the areas I mentioned, so if you don’t
have enough white adipose tissue is alright. In the subcutaneous tissue, you don’t have endocrine activity.
These adipocytes have been very well categorized and they only have adrenergic receptors for
catecholamines. So, if you feel cold, there is a stress reaction to produce heat. There is a very well known
difference.
They were asking me yesterday what kind of apolipoproteins were involved in dyslipidemia and I answered
both, because it’s better to never be dogmatic. So, I cannot say that in the subcutaneous tissue there is
absolutely no production of adipokines, it’s better to say that “to our knowledge” there is no such thing.
There is a consensus definition of metabolic syndrome = association of at least three of the following
Eleonora Deinite
52
08.05.2023 POLI
cardiovascular risk factors. Usually, people with metabolic syndromes are overweight, but it’s never said:
in theory, if I see an obese person, I can assume that that person has a metabolic syndrome, because they
will be insulin resistant, since they are producing the molecules leading to artery hypertension,
hyperglycemia, higher susceptibility to blood clotting and thrombosis. In practice, I should check before
making this kind of statement.
A. central obesity (abdominal) → it can be measured by many sophisticated systems, but the waist
circumference is the most important one: if you pass the limit, you must take action, otherwise you’ll
get in troubles
● > 102 cm in men
● > 88 cm in women
B. hypertriglyceridemia
● Dogma: if you measure twice a fasting glycemia ≥ 150 mg/ml
C. low hematic HDL levels
● < 40% ml in men
● < 50% ml in women
D. systemic artery hypertension (≥ 130 / ≥ 85 mmHg)
E. often characterized by hypercoagulability
F. impaired fasting glycemia (IFG) or reduced glucose tolerance
● ≥ 110 mg/ml
Difference between diseases and syndromes?
● Disease → single cause
→ COVID-19 infection is a disease, because it has a single cause
● Syndrome (from the Greek, “run together”) → multiple causes
→ I don’t get diabetes if I only have a genetic predisposition to it, I get diabetes if the nutrition is not correct, if
there is inflammation etc. (we call diabetes a disease, but it is actually a syndrome)
fig.13
3. increased gut permeability
● Aging is associated with a reduction of beneficial commensal microorganisms like Coprococcus,
Faecalibacterium and Lactobacillus.
● There are also a few microorganisms that can overgrow in our gut in an improper way: it’s difficult
again to give proper information, but the important thing is that, at the present stage of knowledge
of the actual impact of microbiota on our health, we should have a balance in the microbiota. In
particular, since there is a high diversity, we should keep this high diversity: a particular clone of
bacteria should not be amplified, to maintain a good distribution of microbiota.
Eleonora Deinite
53
08.05.2023 POLI
● Facultative anaerobes such as Fusobacterium and Staphylococcus prevail in the gut of older adults, a
status that has been associated with increased levels of inflammatory cytokines in plasma.
● Increased gut dysbiosis has been postulated to increase mucosal barrier permeability, thereby
allowing the entry of bacteria and their products, including pathogen- and damage-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs and DAMPs), due to the damage of the intestinal epithelial, into the
circulatory system. These factors trigger and stimulate inflammatory response because they are
recognised by our immune system, where we have receptors, like Toll-like receptors, able to
recognise the potential infection. There are a lot of proteins, such as the inflammasome, which are
ready to recognise signs of diversity and foreign origin to activate caspase-1 and so on. If some
compounds, generated either by the diet or by the microbiota, reach a toxic concentration, the
enterocytes die and the tight junctions between the different intestinal epithelial cells become leaky
or are destroyed, so the permeability of our semi-permeable intestinal barrier is increased. Gut
permeability is crucial.
● Not only the microbiota affects the gut permeability, also food has a role in it. For example, oxidized
cholesterol obtained by the cooking and roasting of cholesterol-containing food causes a great
amount of non-enzymatic oxysterols that are then digested, which are not in the good cholesterol
enzymatic products I was mentioning before.
4. changes to microbiota composition
● The microbiota consists of the assembly of commensal, symbiotic and pathogenic microorganisms
Bacteria, Protozoa, Fungi and Viruses.
● The microbiome refers to the complete genetic material of the microbiota. Compared to the human
genome, the human microbiome contains 100 times more genes!
There is an interaction between human genome and microbiome: we don’t know much about it, we have just begun
to learn these things. In this field, nutrition is very important: if we feed our microbiota badly or well our microbiota,
we must always take into account that our food will have to do with our microbiota.
5. cellular senescence
● A senescent person is a person aging badly or early.
● Cellular senescence is generally considered to be a pre-encoded cancer suppressor mechanism of
altered cell growth characterized by cell cycle arrest, loss of proliferation capacity, increased nuclear
factor-κB (NF-κB) signaling. Instead of allowing a certain group of cells, maybe stimulated by
inflammation, to proceed towards neoplasia, there are mechanisms that our body can implement to
make these cells aging and dying early.
● Cellular senescence includes the action of inflammatory molecules: one TF important to initiate and
sustain the inflammatory response is NF-kB. If you activate NF-kB and the other inflammatory molecules
too much, you don’t have a physiological process such as cellular senescence or low inflammatory
response, which are good to solve wounds, but you have too much inflammation, which is not good.
Inflammation is physiological only if it is limited in terms of entity and duration. In aging, there is an
amplification of the cellular senescence mechanism: in inflammaging there is an excessive
inflammation and, consequently, an excessive cellular senescence mechanism. Many age-associated
diseases, like cardiovascular diseases, show an excessive activation of this mechanism.
● SNPs located near regulators of senescence and inflammation are particularly associated with
diseases of aging, such as cancer, CVD, and type 2 diabetes.
● Cell senescence can be triggered by many stimuli (fig.14):
Eleonora Deinite
54
08.05.2023 POLI
fig.14
○ persistent DNA damage
○ oncogene activation or inactivation
○ epigenetic alterations
○ mitochondrial dysfunction → reactive oxygen species, both radical and non-radical
○ oxidized phospholipids
○ excessive amount of oxidized cholesterol
○ amyloid-β
○ sodium urate as in gout
○ excessive cholesterol crystals
○ exposure to DAMPs that are released by stressed cells
These factors stimulate autophagy and the activation of the proteasome, which eliminate the damaged
proteins. When these compounds accumulate, they overwhelm our immune system and increase the
inflammation. This typically occurs in aging.
6. NLRP3 inflammasome activation
7. oxidative stress caused by dysfunctional mitochondria
8. immune cell dysregulation
Gene-expression studies show that CD4+ lymphocytes (T helper cells) in given tissues from older individuals
have higher intrinsic activation of the NF-κB pathways than those from younger individuals. Since you have
inflammation, the immunological sector is involved as well.
9. chronic infections
Subclinical and clinically evident chronic infections can continuously stimulate immune
function and result in changes in levels of inflammatory markers that are indistinguishable
from those of the inflammaging signature.
! So, inflammation has an important role in aging and non-communicable disease, so it must be prevented through
proper nutrition, physical activity and control of the body weight to avoid the accumulation of endocrine adipocytes.
All these mechanisms work together and amplify the overall picture of an early and bad aging.
Eleonora Deinite
55
08.05.2023 POLI
I :
NTERVENTIONS TO IMPROVE QUALITY AND DURATION OF THE LIFE PAST AND PRESENT
Until the beginning of the last century the average lifetime was
35-40 years old. Greek, Latin and medieval people live even less,
although in Africa in some areas this is still a problem, for many
causes.
Nowadays, despite many variants, life expectancy keeps
increasing, for many reasons:
fig.15- Youth
● better nutrition Fountain
→ well-balanced diet (it will be more discussed in future lectures)
● availability of vaccines and antibiotics
→ after the discovery of antibiotics life expectancy started to rise unexpectedly in an amazing way
● reduction of genetic damage
→ we saw in the funnel in fig. 4 that different factors, both acquired and hereditary, modify
our genes
→ so far we cannot modify familial predisposition (maybe genetic therapy will be available,
but at the moment it is still a fantasy), but you can modify the environment
● mitochondrial dysfunction restraint
● caloric restriction and obesity prevention by prevention of accumulation of central adipose
tissue
→ it’s easy to do it in theory, but in practice it is difficult to convince people to do it
● anti- inflammatory drugs
→ some of your parents/grandparents take aspirin, which is an anti-inflammatory and anti–clotting
drug, which is may be not sufficient, but it is a common habit to take aspirin after a certain age
● elimination of senescent cells
● control of cholesterol metabolism
● stem cell therapy
→ it is still a fantasy for the moment, but in some cases we already did genetic therapy
We should not search for everlasting youth, but we should at least try to attain a successful and healthy aging.
In the next lesson we will speak about nutrition.
Eleonora Deinite
56
