02.03.2023 GAMBA L.1
ANEMIAS
B
LOOD COMPOSITION
Blood composition is summarized as follows:
- Solid Portion: 45% of volume
- Liquid Portion: plasma, defined as serum when it is free of fibrinogen and other coagulation proteins
The main cells present in blood are the erythrocytes (5 million every mL) and leukocytes (4500-11000 every
mL).
Fig.1 presents a table describing the
adult reference range of leukocytes
in adults (leukocytes formula):
- Neutrophils - 60% of total
leukocytes, most abundant.
Neutrophils are the main player in
acute inflammation.
- Lymphocytes - 31%
- Monocytes - 5%
- Eosinophils - 3,5%.
- Basophils - 0,5%
Fig.1
In fig.2 you can find the normal adult reference ranges concerning red blood cells (to be known
if examining anaemic patient):
- Haemoglobin is a globular protein responsible for O2 transport in RBCs, its concentration is measured in
g/dL. Generally: 13 g/dL in men and 12 g/dL in women, under these values the patient is anaemic.
- Hematocrit is the volume occupied by RBCs, it is expressed in %. Generally: 44% in men and 38% in women.
- MCV - mean cell volume – it expresses the average cell volume of red blood cells; it is expressed in
femtoliters (fL). To calculate it, the hematocrit has to be divided for the number of RBCs, which ranges around
~80 fL. Hematocrit/n° red cells. This value is really important because some anemias are characterised by an
abnormal MCV.
- MCH - mean cell haemoglobin - concentration of Hb in one RBC, expressed in picograms [Hb]/n° red cells.
- MCHC - mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration - refers to the average concentration of Hb in a
given volume of cells, expressed in g/100mL.
Fig.2
Alice Bertozzi, Ekin Raman
1
02.03.2023 GAMBA L.1
H
EMATOPOIESIS
It concerns the process, which takes place in the bone marrow(fig.3), consisting in the formation,
proliferation and differentiation of new blood cells, deriving from the
same initial progenitor, which is a pluripotent stem cell (total stem cell-
HSC) (progenitor cells are mainly multipotent cells that can differentiate
into many types of cells, while precursor cells are unipotent cells that
can only differentiate into a particular type of cells).
HSC is at the apex of the hierarchy of bone marrow progenitors,
maintaining a normal volume of hematopoietic tissue over time,
increasing it if needed.
In the bone marrow are present many progenitor cells:
- 60% give rise to granulocytes’ lineage.
- 25% are erythroblasts and give rise to RBCs’ lineage.
- 15% give rise to lymphoid lineage, platelets, and fibroblasts’
Fig.3
precursors.
After the totipotent stem cell, two stem cells lineages are produced (fig.4):
1. CFU-GEMM: colony forming units of
granulocytes (G), erythrocytes (E),
monocytes (M) (which then
differentiate into macrophages in the
different tissues) and megakaryocytes
(M); it brings to the formation of all the
myeloid lineage.
To be remembered about erythrocytes’
lineage:
- Proerythroblast, containing specific
receptors for EPO on the surface that
stimulate the differentiation of the
lineage when detected.
- Basophilic erythroblast
- Polychromatic erythroblast
- Reticulocyte, which the last precursor
of the red blood cells and it is already
released into the blood. There is a
condition called reticulocytosis which
consist in the presence of a lot of
reticulocytes in the blood.
- Erythrocytes
Fig.4
2. CFU-L: colony forming unit of lymphocytes, giving rise to the lymphoid lineage.
Stem cells initially proliferate repeatedly forming a proliferative compartment. Then the proliferative activity
slows down (because their proliferation ability decreases) and they start differentiating and maturating start,
this process occurs in a particular compartment of the bone marrow called maturation-proliferation
compartment. At the end, the cells lose their ability to proliferate and these non-proliferating cells in the
advanced maturation state accumulate in the maturation compartment. This is followed by the storage and
functional compartment.
There is not a storage compartment, in the bone marrow, for the erythrocytes. Instead, there is a storage
compartment for granulocytes, they get released in the blood in case of need (e.g. during acute inflammation,
Alice Bertozzi, Ekin Raman
2
02.03.2023 GAMBA L.1
or in the presence of a damage in a tissue).
Cells lifespan in the bone marrow and outside of it varies (fig.5):
- Neutrophils are found in the bone marrow in the proliferation-maturation compartment and
storage as well, some of them are functional in the peripheral blood (50%), they are the
only one emigrating to peripheral tissues, where they exert their macrophagic function.
- Platelets and erythrocytes, as they are just formed, are released and do not form a storage compartment
in the bone marrow. In fact, all erythrocytes are present in circulation, they remain there for 120 days and
then become senescent and die, there is no storage compartment.
Fig.5
B ( ):
ONE MARROW TRANSPLANT HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL TRANSPLANT
Malignant Disease:
- Acute Myeloid Leukaemia/Acute Lymphocytic Leukaemia
- Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia/Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia
Non-Malignant Diseases:
- Aplastic anaemia
- Severe Combined Immune Deficiency Syndrome (SCID)
- Thalassemia
- Sickle Cell anaemia
- Fanconi anaemia
R
ETICULOCYTES
They are immature RBCs, consisting in the last passage of the differentiation and they are released in the
blood. In the blood there might be reticulocytosis, indicating high levels of reticulocytes when new RBCs are
requested by the body, in case of anaemia or conditions such as anaemia, hypobaropathy.
They differentiate from RBCs for still possessing nuclei and some mitochondria, they can still synthesise Hb,
after 24/48 they become RBCs, which are anucleated (for this reason they appear pale in the centre) and
biconcave, they cannot synthesise new haemoglobin.
Formation of red blood cell:
- Progressive nuclear condensation → elimination of nucleus
- Progressive accumulation of Hb
Quantity of reticulocytes: 0.5%/1.5% of all erythrocytes present in the bloodstream (both mature and
immature). The daily loss of 1% of the erythrocytes is balanced by an equal production of reticulocytes.
H (HGF)
EMATOPOIETIC GROWTH FACTORS
Hematopoietic growth factors contribute to the production of blood cells. There are many of them, the most
Alice Bertozzi, Ekin Raman
3
02.03.2023 GAMBA L.1
important are Multi colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) or IL3, and EPO (which stimulates the differentiation
of erythrocytes in the bone marrow). The rate of production of EPO is controlled by hypo-oxygenation of
tissues, inducing erythropoiesis. In case of hypoxia (e.g., in hypobaropathy) kidneys and liver produce EPO,
which goes into the bone marrow, binds to its receptor located on the surface of pro-erythroblasts and
stimulates their differentiation into erythrocytes. By doing this EPO induce bone marrow hyperplasia (cell
adaptation in which the specific tissue increases in dimension, because the cells composing that tissue are
increasing in number).
The main transcription factor that regulate the expression and synthesis (and the release by the kidneys) of
EPO is HIF-1 (hypoxia inducible factor-1). HIF-1 is normally present in sarcoplasm in the form of a
heterodimer composed by two subunits, alpha and beta subunits. In normal conditions (when the level of
oxygen is normal), the alpha subunit is hydroxylated (this reaction is favored by oxygen), after that it is
ubiquitinated (bound to ubiquitin), in this way it is marked for proteosome degradation (this system is called
ubiquitin-proteosome system and it is activated). The proteosome recognize this subunit and degrades it. In
this way HIF-1 is not working and can’t induce the synthesis of EPO.
In case of hypoxia, the alpha subunit is not hydroxylated (the enzyme regulating hydroxylation is not
activated by oxygen) and, hence, it can’t be ubiquitinated and degraded by proteosome. Hence, HIF-1
remains active and it is able to translocate in the nucleus and binds to specific site of the DNA leading to the
over expression of genes encoding for EPO.
Another important factor is the VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor), which is involved in angiogenesis.
Angiogenesis is stimulated in case of hypoxia, and it is also an important process in case of a tumor.
M -
ONOCYTE MACROPHAGE CELL LINE
(Fig.6) After being formed, monocytes go into bloodstream, once in the
tissue monocytes can differentiate into macrophages, by expressing and
synthesize new molecules on cell’s surface, able to recognize foreign
bodies present in the environmental space. They are pivotal in chronic
inflammation (while the exit of neutrophils from blood is the main key-
point process in acute inflammation).
Fig.6
C RBC
HARACTERISTICS OF S
- They are responsible for transport of O2 to the tissue, and CO2 to
the pulmonary alveoli. Since this transport takes place via
hemoglobin, it has the task of maintaining the functionality of this
cellular component.
- Their plasma membrane is particularly flexible (deformable), as
RBCs have to pass in small capillaries changing their physical
characteristics (they run from 300 to 400 km along vessels that also
have a smaller diameter than its own, so it must be able to change
its shape), and if they are not deformable, they break down → Fig.7
haemolytic anaemia.
- The nucleus is not present (anucleated). In a transversal section (fig.7) they look
biconcave (in the middle it is empty), from upwards they look circular and less
coloured in the centre.
- The diameter of a RBC is about 8 μM, thickness of about 2.5 μM at the
periphery and 0.8 μM in the centre; average life of about 120 days; By
observation of a blood smear (fig.8), they normally have the size of a nucleus of a
small lymphocyte, whose nucleus completes almost all of its surface. If smaller,
then the patient is affected by a microcytic anaemia, if bigger macrocytic
anaemia.
Fig.8
Alice Bertozzi, Ekin Raman
4
02.03.2023 GAMBA L.1
H (H )
AEMOGLOBIN B
Hb (fig.9) is composed of 4 globin chains bound to the heme group, consequently
binding iron.
There are 3 types of Hb:
- Hb A type (fig.10) - making up 97% of all Hb in
adults, composed of 2α-2β globin chains.
- Hb A2 type - making up 3% of all Hb in adults,
composed of 2α and 2δ chains.
- Foetal Hb - composed of 2α and 2γ chains; after
birth it is completely substituted by the standard
ones.
Fig.9
A Fig.10
NEMIAS
It is a non-malignant blood disease, consisting in the reduction of the Hb concentration and/or of the number
of red blood cells below normal limits (fig.2) in subjects of the same age and same sex. The oxygen-carrying
capacity of the blood is reduced, leading to tissue hypoxia.
They can be classified according to morphological or pathophysiological criteria.
M
ORPHOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
● Basing on the red cell size (evaluated by MCV):
- Microcytic anaemia - the dimension of the RBC is lower than the normal one.
- Normocytic anaemia - the dimension of the RBC remains unchanged (what changes is the number of
erythrocytes).
- Macrocytic anaemia - the dimension of the RBC is bigger than the normal one.
● Basing on the degree of hemoglobinization, which is reflected on the colour of red cells and indicates the
quantity of Hb:
- Normochromic anaemia.
- Hypochromic anaemia, paler.
There are also conditions in which anemias addressed as hyperchromic, but in these cases the color is not
due to an increased in the quantity of Hb but it is due an increased size of the cells (macrocytic anemias).
● Basing on the shape of red cells – morphology (fig.11) (the professor prefers this method of classification):
Blood smear allows the identification of abnormalities in the morphology of the red cells → poikilocytosis,
the shape of RBCs is different from the normal one. The correct identification of the specific type of
poikilocytes allows to distinguish the various forms of anaemia, the shape might be anomalous:
- Sickle cells anaemia → the RBCs look like a sickle.
- Acanthocytosis → deformation appears on the surface (at the level of the membrane) and might be due to
accumulation of cholesterol.
- Spherocytosis → circular shape (not biconcave) due to alteration of cytoskeleton. It is a hemolytic anemia.
- Elliptocytosis → elliptic shape, their volume is unchanged, but they are more rigid, RBCs are trapped and
destroyed in smaller vessels → hemolytic anaemia.
-Sideropenic anaemia → paler RBCs and smaller than usual (hypochromic-microcytic anaemia). It’s caused
by iron deficiency.
Alice Bertozzi, Ekin Raman
5
02.03.2023 GAMBA L.1
-Megaloblastic anaemia → due to the deficiency of vitamin B12, cells look bigger and can be destroyed in
smaller vessels.
Fig.11
Q: “What is the difference between megaloblastic and macrocytic anemia?”
A: “I’ll show you later, however in macrocytic the mature red blood cells are bigger than normal, megaloblastic
anemia is the same type of anemia but is mainly referred to the precursors in the bone marrow, which are
bigger than normal. Most of the time these bigger precursors die in the bone marrow, however sometimes
they can mature and give rise to bigger erythrocytes”.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
Pathophysiological classification is based on the etiology and characteristics of diseases. They all cause a
state of hypoxia in the tissues, but the cause of their origin is different.
1.Anemias of blood loss, hemorrhagic conditions.
2.Anemias of reduced erythropoiesis, bone marrow is not able to produce the right amount RBCs. It is caused
by a damage to the stem compartment (aplasia) or a damage to the proliferating compartment. If the cell
damaged is the totipotent stem cell, all blood elements are lacking (this condition is called pancytopenia).
a. Aplastic anaemia
b. Pure red cell aplasia
c. Anemias due to chronic renal failure
d. Anemias due to endocrine disorders
e. Anemias due to altered DNA synthesis → due to vitamin B12 deficiency (e.g. pernicious anaemia) or
due to folate deficiency.
f. Anemias due to altered heme synthesis→ iron deficiency anaemia.
g. Anemias due to decreased synthesis of globin → thalassemia syndrome.
3. Hemolytic anemias caused by RBCs excessively destroyed in blood, though their production is regular.
a) Hemolytic anemias with intra-globular defects:
I. Intrinsic defects in the red blood cell membrane → hereditary spherocytosis, elliptocytosis,
acanthocytosis.
II. Extrinsic factors→e.g. immune reaction or in runners (their continuous running brings to the
continuous destruction of RBCs).
III. Defects in the Hb structure→ sickle cell disease.
Alice Bertozzi, Ekin Raman
6
02.03.2023 GAMBA L.1
IV. Red cell enzyme defects → PK deficiency, G6PD deficiency.
b) Hemolytic anemias with extra-globular defects
I. Antibody-mediated destruction→ hemolytic disease of the newborn
II. Resulting from trauma to red cells
III. From infectious, chemical, and physical agents
Keep in mind that sometimes you can find, for example, pernicious anemia and/or thalassemia syndrome
classified among hemolytic anemias. That’s because, from the pathophysiological point of view thalassemia
syndrome are caused by a decreased synthesis of globin, hence there is a reduced production of RBCs, but
the produced RBCs are not normal and they may be destroyed in the circulation. To sum up, classifying
thalassemia syndrome (or pernicious anemia) as hemolytic anemia is not a mistake, as it’s not a mistake
classifying it among the anemia of reduced erythropoiesis.
A
NEMIA OF BLOOD LOSS
In this type of anemia, the red blood cells are lost due to an hemorrhage.
- Characterized by normocytic and normochromic anemia.
- Immediately after the blood loss, anemia may appear less severe than how it turns out later.
- 24-48 hours after the blood loss, the blood volume (just the volume, not the quantity of RBCs) is rapidly
restored by the intravascular shift of water from the interstitial fluid compartment. Hemodilution takes place
(lowering of the hematocrit), the production of new erythrocytes does not occur immediately, when bleeding
stops there is hyperplasia of the erythroid series (bone marrow hyperplasia) mediated by the EPO. Generally
new RBCs are produced when erythrocytes come at the end of their life span.
- The reduction in oxygenation triggers increased secretion of erythropoietin from the kidney, which
stimulates the proliferation of committed erythroid progenitors (CFU-E) in the marrow. It takes about 5 days
for the progeny of these CFU-Es to mature and appear as newly released red cells (reticulocytes) in the
peripheral blood.
Possible exam question (mentioned in 2021-2022’ lecture): Reduced amount of RBCs synthesis is not
compensated with compensation of more Hb produced, but of progenitors’ hyperplasia in the bone marrow.
What kind of process is this hyperplasia of the bone marrow? → cell adaptation (reversible increase in the
number of tissues of a certain tissue). If the stimulus that started the process comes back to normal (O2 supply
in this case) it goes back to physiological conditions. For normoplasia to be restored, there must be the
induction of cell apoptosis of those proliferated cells.
A
NEMIA OF REDUCED ERYTHROPOIESIS
Fig.12
a) Aplastic anaemia. It is a disease concerning the
totipotent/pluripotent stem cell (fig.12), leading to bone marrow
failure and its hypocellularity. Consequently, all blood cells reduce
in number → pancytopenia (leukocytes, and platelets are reduced
too, causing leukopenia and thrombocytopenia). Anaemia can
cause progressive weakness, pallor, and dyspnea.
• Primitive causes → hereditary Fanconi’s syndrome, present in
hereditary pancytopenia and idiopathics. There are 23 genes
causing the syndrome, leading to bone marrow failure, progressive
damage and failure of the pluripotent stem cell, and a high
predisposition of cancer.
• Secondary causes
➢ chemical agents (benzene, xylol, insecticides)
➢ physical agents (ionizing radiations)
➢ drugs (cytostatics,arsenic compounds, anticonvulsants)
➢ infectious agents (viral hepatitis, tuberculosis)
Alice Bertozzi, Ekin Raman
7
02.03.2023 GAMBA L.1
The damaged stem cells can give rise to a stem cell apparently identical to the original one but with reduced
proliferative an differentiative capacity (leading to bone marrow aplasia), or, eventually, they can bring to
the expression of specific molecules (new antigens) to the surface of stem cells, which are immediately
recognized and stimulate an autoimmune reaction. Hence, the stem cells are destroyed, or they slowdown
in differentiation and proliferation, leading to failure of bone marrow.
Fig.13 shows a biopsy of the bone marrow, the precursor of
Fig.13
all lineages (myeloid lineage and lymphoid lineage)
normally occupies spaces which here are replaced by
adipocytes (the white cells in fig.13). When the slide is
prepared sulfate is used.
Fanconi’s anaemia (fig.14): it’s an example of aplastic
anemia, due to a hereditary condition. It is characterised by
bone marrow aplasia and consequently pancytopenia. It
presents mutations in several genes (twenty-two FA genes),
leading to bone marrow failure and high predisposition to cancer (breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility).
Fanconi’s anemia is not only characterised by a very
sever aplastic anemia, but also by skeletal
malformations, cardiac defects, short stature and a lot
other clinical features.
b) Pure cell aplasia
Primary marrow disorder in which only
erythroid progenitors are suppressed, the bone
marrow is aplastic. In severe cases, red cell
Fig.14
progenitors are completely absent from the
marrow, due to a specific proliferative defect of the precursors of the red cells. Leukocytes and
platelets are normal, there are different types:
➢ Acquired (haemolytic anemias, infections, or drug exposure)
➢ Constitutional
Bone marrow cellularity is normal (despite the severe lack of erythrocyte precursors). The erythroid
series may be missing entirely or be blocked at the erythroblast stage.
c) Anemias due to chronic renal failure
It is a normochromic and normocytic anemia characterized by a decreased production and increased
destruction of erythrocytes. The decreased production of RBCs is due both to a metabolic damage to
the erythroblasts, and to a decreased production of EPO from the kidneys to proerythroblasts.
The main cause is the reduced production of EPO → Treatment: EPO administration.
d) Anemias of endocrine disorders
It is a normochromic and normocytic anemia. It is due to hormone deficiencies affecting
erythropoiesis such as those found in hypopituitarism, hypothyroidism, Addison's disease (adrenal
insufficiency) and hypogonadism.
e) Anemias due to altered DNA synthesis
They are mainly related to deficiency in vitamin B12 (e.g. pernicious anemia) and folic acids (vitamin
B9), necessary for DNA synthesis. Both types of anaemia are megaloblastic, in the bone marrow it is
possible to find bigger precursors than normal ones.
The deficiency results in this a abnormal size, and they are directly destroyed in the bone marrow
(intra-medullary death) as they have difficulties passing over it → ineffective erythropoiesis.
In the blood there aren’t enough RBCs. The few RBCs found in the blood are bigger than normal, and
they might be destroyed as well in the periphery → might be classified also as haemolytic anaemia.
Alice Bertozzi, Ekin Raman
8
02.03.2023 GAMBA L.1
The impairment in the DNA production, brings to the formation of big cells with a defective nuclear
maturation, they try to proliferate becoming bigger, but then they are not able to divide due to
nucleus - cytoplasm asynchronicity. The cytoplasm is not proportional to the nucleus, resulting in
bigger than physiological circumstances. The large erythroid precursors and RBCs are destroyed, and
bone marrow hyperplasia is stimulated, being a response to less O2 supply and increased levels of
growth factors, such as EPO.
Anemias due to altered synthesis of DNA often give rise to pancytopenia, because the difficulty in
proliferating involves all the types of cells.
➢ Vitamin B12 deficiency. Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) is
fundamental for DNA synthesis.
Metabolism of vitamin B12 (fig.15): it is taken up with
the diet and synthesized by the intestinal flora. Vit.
B12 is contained in foods of animal origin, hence,
people who follow a vegan diet (and do not assume
extra vit. B12) might have a deficiency of this vitamin.
Vitamin B12 is bound to binding proteins contained in
food:
- In the stomach, the vitamin is freed from the binding
proteins (thanks to the action of pepsin) and binds to
a salivary protein called haptocorrin (green in fig.15),
forming the vitamin B12-haptocorrin complex.
-Then, the thanks to the action of pancreatic enzymes
(proteases) haptocorrin is dissociated from vit. B12
and, always in the stomach, the action of pepsin
allows vit. B12 to bind to an intrinsic factor (F1), which
is produced by the gastric parietal cells.
- In the intestine (at the level of the terminal ileum)
the vit. B12-F1 complex finds specific receptors (called
cubilin) for the intrinsic factor itself. In this way, B12
is absorbed.
Fig.15
- In the blood vitamin B12 is transported by a group of proteins: transcobalamin.
In case of a deficiency of vit. B12 or folate, the nucleic maturation is not carried on, due to altered DNA
synthesis. However, cytoplasmic maturation and Hb
Fig.16
maturation proceed regularly → nucleus - cytoplasm
asynchronicity (the nucleus is small, and the cytoplasm is very
big).
This causes the formation of larger precursors - megaloblastic
precursors (fig.16) - in the bone marrow, most of them are
destroyed in the bone marrow (ineffective hematopoiesis)
and, those that mature, result macrocytic and they are
destroyed in the peripheral vessels (hemolytic anaemia). It
should be normochromic.
In the blood smear (fig.17) peculiar neutrophils can be found,
being hypersegmented and six- lobed nucleus. It can also be noticed the poikilocytosis (the RBCs have
different shapes, some are bigger, some are smaller, some are elongated and so on) and anisocytosis
(difference in size).
An example of vitamin B12 deficiency is pernicious anaemia: it is due to vitamin B12 deficiency, lack of
absorption, due to an autoimmune disorder.
It is characterized by the presence of auto-antibodies against the intrinsic factor, masking its binding site to
Alice Bertozzi, Ekin Raman
9
02.03.2023 GAMBA L.1
the one of the vit B12 (anti-F1 auto-Ab), or auto-antibodies
Fig.17
against the parietal cells of the stomach (anti-parietal
auto-Ab) leading to the lack of production of F1. There is
also an other auto-immune condition in which the auto-
antibodies bind the receptors for the vit. B12-F1 complex
in the gut. In all these cases the vitamin is not absorbed.
Characteristics of pernicious anaemia:
- Fundic gland atrophy and metaplastic change
(intestinalization: the cells of the stomach differentiate in
cells similar to the one present at the level of the gut. It is
a precancerous condition) → when antibodies are directed to enterocytes.
NB: parenteral administration of vitamin B12 corrects the megaloblastic changes in the marrow but gastric
atrophy persists.
NB: The gastric atrophy and metaplastic changes are due to autoimmunity and not vit B12 deficiency!
- Atrophic glossitis (the tongue becomes shiny, glazed and “beefy”).
- Spastic paresis, sensory ataxia and severe paresthesias in the lower limbs.
➢ Folate deficiency, Folic acid is fundamental for the synthesis of DNA. It is mostly present in
our blood in the form of methyltetrahydrofolate.
Recap:
Classification of anemias is based on their pathophysiology:
1. Anemias due to blood loss.
2. Anemias due to diminished erythropoiesis, among the different types were included the ones due
to:
e) Altered DNA synthesis, due to:
I. Vitamin B12 deficiency (fig.18), which is macrocytic for the presence of megaloblasts, producing RBCs
being bigger than usual, they cannot mature in the bone marrow and die. Anyway, some of the RBCs
can mature and be released in the bloodstream, being bigger than normal. At the end they are
destroyed at peripheral circulation, this type of anaemia can also be classified as hemolytic anaemia,
for the presence of inefficient erythropoiesis and hemolysis.
II. Folate deficiency (fig.18)
Fig.18
3. Hemolytic anemias.
Alice Bertozzi, Ekin Raman
10
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
ANEMIA
L
AST LESSON RECAP
Classification of anemias is based on their pathophysiology:
- Anemias due to blood loss.
- Anemias due to diminished erythropoiesis, among the different types were included the ones due
to:
o Altered DNA synthesis, due to:
▪ Vitamin B12 deficiency, which is macrocytic for the presence of megaloblasts,
producing RBCs bigger than usual, that cannot mature in the bone marrow and die
there. Anyways, some of the RBCs can mature and be released in the bloodstream,
being bigger than normal. However, at the end, they are destroyed at the level 0of
the peripheral circulation. This type of anemia can also be classified as hemolytic
anemia, for the presence of inefficient erythropoiesis and hemolysis.
▪ Folate deficiency
- Hemolytic anemias, in which we have less red blood cells because of an increased hemolysis.
ANEMIA DUE TO DIMINISHED ERYTHROPOIESIS
ANEMIA DUE TO ALTERED DNA SYNTHESIS
V B12 D
ITAMIN EFICIENCY
● Lack of vitamin B12 can drive from:
● Decreased or inadequate intake of vitamin
● Vegetarian diet (B12 is mainly found in food of animal origin)
○ Impaired absorption due to Intrinsic factor deficiency, which can be caused by:
an autoimmune response against the Intrinsic factor
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
11
○ 13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
an autoimmune response against the gastric parietal cells of the stomach that
produce the intrinsic factor for absorption of vitamin B12.
→ pernicious anemia
In case of pernicious anemia, megaloblasts are found in the bone marrow and macrocytic RBCs are found
in the bloodstream.
ANEMIA DUE TO ALTERED HEME SYNTHESIS
I
RON DEFICIENCY ANEMIA
It can be caused by:
- deficiency of iron, necessary for heme synthesis
- Defective iron uptake
- Increased iron requirement (pregnancy and lactation)
- Altered use of iron
- Faulty synthesis of heme
- Chronic blood loss
fig.1
It is a microcytic anemia. In order to notice it, it is necessary to observe the blood smear and compare the
dimension of the red cells with the nucleus of a lymphocyte (the dark purple cell). In normal conditions they
have the same dimension but in this case the red cells are much smaller.
It is a hypochromic anemia: red cells are less colored than normal. The central pale area (due to the absence
of a nucleus) is larger than in normal cells, where it is ⅓ the diameter of the erythrocyte.
Furthermore, it is also possible to highlight the alteration in the shape of erythrocytes. Looking at this blood
smear (fig.2) we can observe a microcytic and hypochromic anemia, characterized by the presence of
normal cells (the more colored erythrocytes) which are due to a recent blood transfusion.
There are also different shapes of erythrocytes in the same blood smear and this phenomenon is called
poikilocytosis. In fact in the smear (fig.2) some cells are round, some others are very elongated (pencil
cells).
fig.2
IRON METABOLISM
The dietary iron intake is 20 mg/day and to maintain a normal iron balance, about 1 mg of iron must be
absorbed from the diet every day. This is due to the fact that only 10% of the iron that we ingest is actually
absorbed. It is estimated that men usually intake more iron than necessary, for it has been estimated that
men eat meat more than women.
Iron is absorbed in the gut, by the duodenum and proximal jejunum. About 85% of the absorbed iron is
transported in the blood by iron-binding glycoproteins, such as transferrin, and is incorporated into the
maturing red blood cells (in the bone marrow) thanks to specific receptors.
When senescent erythrocytes are removed from the circulation through the spleen (after 120 days),
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
12
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
hemoglobin is degraded and iron is recycled.
Excess iron is accumulated as hemosiderin (disorganized aggregates of
iron) or ferritin (ordered aggregates of iron with apoferritin).
fig.3
Iron absorption - gut
Food iron can be absorbed in two different ways (fig.4):
- Heme iron (that we eat in meat) → easily absorbed through
heme transporter, 25% of heme iron is absorbed directly from
the gut.
- Non-heme iron → DMT1 transporter, more difficult to be
absorbed.
Free iron is present also in vegetables, but mainly present in the
3+
oxidized form Fe (ferric iron). Proteins located on the surface of the
epithelial cells such as duodenal cytochrome B (ferrireductase) reduce
2+
iron in the form Fe (ferrose iron), easier to absorb. The acidic
environment present in the stomach, and also the ascorbic acid (vitamin
C), facilitate the maintenance of iron in the reduced form.
Once inside the mucosal cells, iron can bind ferritin, then it can either
remain inside the cell without being used to produce red blood cells or
it can pass into the circulation through ferroportin, which is a transporter located in the basal membrane
of the mucosal cells.
Ferroportin is regulated by hepcidin, a protein produced by the liver, which once produced inhibits
ferroportin. Instead, when RBCs need to be produced1, the liver slows down the production of hepcidin
so that ferroportin is not inhibited and iron is absorbed more efficiently → negative loop.
Once iron has passed through ferroportin, it can enter the blood and, once oxidized again in ferric iron, it
binds a protein called transferrin, that transport iron in the bone marrow, where it finds on the surface
of erythroid precursor, some specific receptors that have high affinity with tranferrin iron. So, the
erythroid precursors absorb iron through receptor-mediated endocytosis and then iron is used for heme
synthesis.
Once in the bone marrow, iron will be used to produce erythrocytes while, once in the liver, it will act as
a signal increasing the production of hepcidin.
1
in case of anemias, haemorrhages or hypobaropathies → hyperoxygenation of the tissue → EPO production
→ bone marrow hyperplasia.
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
13
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
fig.4
● Causes of iron deficiencies:
● Insufficient intake with diet (vegetarianism/veganism).
● Defective iron uptake
● Increased iron requirement (pregnancy, lactation)
Chronic blood loss because of a gastrointestinal or genitourinary (females) hemorrhage (the most
● frequent cause).
● Chronic inflammatory disorders, altered use of iron in chronic diseases.
sideroblastic anemias: iron is accumulated in the bone marrow but is not used for the synthesis
of heme, so it accumulates in the mitochondria of erythroblasts, altering their functions.
Intramedullary death of erythroid precursor (ineffective erythropoiesis).
This type of anemia can be:
- Idiopathic
- Secondary to inflammatory diseases, neoplasms, drugs and ethanol.
ANEMIAS DUE TO DECREASED SYNTHESIS OF GLOBIN
T
HALASSEMIA SYNDROMES
Thalassemia syndromes might be classified also among hemolytic anemias. They are diffused in the
Mediterranean basin and are a heterogeneous group of disorders. They are caused by inherited
mutations that decrease the synthesis of either:
- α-globin chain
- β-globin chain
Both of them compose adult hemoglobin, therefore the reduced synthesis of these chains leads to the
formation of an abnormal hemoglobin and this causes the aggregation of hemoglobin in the plasma
membrane. This leads to the formation of rigid red blood cells, that are destroyed in the peripheral
bloodstream, characterizing thalassemia by hemolysis of RBCs → hemolytic anemia.
This type of anemia is put in second class, because the aggregation of four α chains or β chains already
occurs in the bone marrow, so, the precursors of the red blood cells are already abnormal, too rigid, and
they usually die in the bone marrow → reduced ineffective erythropoiesis.
Haemoglobin A (α2β2) abnormalities lead to anemia, tissue hypoxia, and red cell hemolysis related to
imbalance in globin chain synthesis. β-thalassemia represents a chronic state of ineffective erythropoiesis
(due to the death of erythrocyte precursors).
Thalassemias are hypochromic and microcytic anemias. We can
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
14
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
● divide them in:
● β-Thalassemia: caused by a deficient synthesis of β chains
α-Thalassemia: caused by a deficient synthesis of α chains
In fig.5 is present a blood smear of a patient suffering from β-thalassemia, we can easily observe:
- Variation in size (Anisocytosis)
- Variation in shape (Poikilocytosis)
- Microcytosis
- Hypochromia (pale color of red cells)
fig.5
Eventually, some pale erythrocytes have a pink dot in their centre, which represents only an
accumulation of hemoglobin and NOT a nucleus. These cells are also called target cells2.
Furthermore, we can see what resembles a nucleated erythrocyte, possessing a nucleus → purple dot
in the centre, which is a normoblast, nucleated red cell precursor. They may be released into the
blood.
Β-T
HALASSEMIA
It is caused by a nonsense point mutation3 in the gene that leads to diminishing the synthesis of β-globin
chains. It is the most common genetic disorder in the world. It is very widespread in the countries of the
Mediterranean basin (Italy, mainly Sardinia, Sicily, Ferrara, and Greece), it accounts for 3 million cases,
mostly heterozygous.
● It can be divided into:
● Major (Homozygous-Cooley disease)
Minor (Heterozygous disease)
- Major β-Thalassemia: is characterized by ineffective production of β-globin and Hemoglobin A is
composed of 4 α-chains, instead of 2α-chains and 2 β-chains. This leads to an unstable
hemoglobin that precipitates on the cell membrane of the RBCs precursors, making red blood
cells very fragile and rigid. Particular types of hemolytic anemias are actually due to alterations
in the plasma membrane of the RBCs since the membrane must be deformable to pass through
2
Cellule bersaglio, in italian
3
Nonsense point mutation changes the aa codon into a stop codon, truncating the protein, without function.
Ex. beta globin gene: CAG (glutamine) → UAG (STOP codon) → autosomal recessive mutation, causing the protein to
be rapidly degraded
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
15
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
the capillaries.
The ineffective erythropoiesis leads to intramedullary death of erythrocytes precursor and the
remaining red cells, which circulate with a very low amount of hemoglobin and present numerous
metabolic abnormalities, undergo hemolysis.
The symptoms appear in the first year of life, being fatal in the first two decade of life:
- Development deficit
- Alteration of all short bones (fig.6): anemia causes hypoxia, the kidneys begin to secrete
erythropoietin trying to increase the amount of erythrocytes and so trying to increase
oxygenation of tissues. This leads to hyper proliferation of red blood cells precursors
resulting in a hyperplasia of the bone marrow with the consequent deformity of the
bones.
fig.6
- Hepatic-splenomegaly: the spleen is rich in resident macrophages whose role is to destroy
the old apoptotic red blood cells. In case of a non-physiological hemolysis, the amount of
red blood cells to be destroyed increases and consequently also the resident
macrophages increase, leading to the enlargement of this organ.
- Infections
- Cardiac complications
- Iron accumulation in Heart and Liver due to a massive hemolysis that can lead to iron
overload and Hemochromatosis.
In fig.7 we see a normal erythroblast in the blood marrow, its hemoglobin has 2α2β chains, so also the red
blood cells will be normal, because the bone marrow will release normal reticulocytes that will mature
within 24-48 hours. In β-thalassemia, β globin is not synthesized, so in the plasma membrane we may find
insoluble α globin aggregates that lead to the formation to abnormal and rigid erythroblasts in the bone
marrow. Most erythroblast die intramedullary, and this leads to ineffective erythropoiesis. The kidney
sense that there is an hypoxic condition in the tissue, and in response they release erythropoietin that go
in the bone marrow, bind to specific receptors in the precursors and tries to stimulate erythropoiesis. In
order to allow the formation of new precursor, we have to absorb bigger quantities of iron to create more
heme. Sometimes iron absorption is too much in comparison to the one that is actually needed, so we can
have a systemic iron overload. The few abnormal red cells that leave the bone marrow have α globin
aggregates in the plasma membrane, so they are not deformable, so they are destroyed in the capillaries
of the peripheral blood, but also at the level of the spleen, the liver.
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
16
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
fig.7
- Minor β-Thalassemia: is the heterozygous form of β-thalassemia, meaning that it has only one
mutated allele and that there is a reduction of 50% in the production of globin β chains. It is
usually asymptomatic or mild and can aggravate in female patients during pregnancy or during
severe infectious processes.
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS
This type of anemias are characterised by an increased destruction of circulating red blood cells.
● They are divided into two groups:
● Intra-globular defects (problems related to red blood cells)
Extra-globular defects (problems related to something which is not a red blood cell)
In physiological conditions, red blood cells undergo apoptosis when senescent (after 120 days). It is an
active process that needs ATP resulting in the formation of apoptotic bodies, which are then digested by
spleen resident macrophages.
In pathological condition hemolysis can be classified as:
- Intravascular (less common): RBCs are destroyed in the peripheral circulation due to a mechanical
injury.
Ex. this can happen during a marathon run, where RBCs are destroyed under the feet at each step,
or in people who play drums with their hands, where RBCs break with each percussion (obviously
after a long time of playing the instrument).
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
17
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
- Extravascular (majority): is caused by alteration that renders RBC membranes less deformable,
leading to their sequestration and phagocytosis by spleen resident macrophages. This process
will lead to macrophages hyperplasia and so to splenomegaly.
Hemolytic anemias share the following features:
- Shortened RBC life span (below the normal 120 days);
- Elevated erythropoietin levels and a compensatory increase in erythropoiesis (compensatory
hyperplasia);
- Prominent reticulocytosis in the peripheral blood, due to increased erythropoiesis;
- Accumulation of hemoglobin degradation products (iron accumulation in the spleen, liver and
bone marrow, hemosiderosis).
Clinical manifestations:
- Variable grade anemia;
- Pre-hepatic jaundice (increase
in the quantity of
unconjugated bilirubin in the
blood, which comes from
heme degradation);
- Asthenia and fatigue (low
quantity of oxygen);
- Lower limb ulcers;
- Splenomegaly;
- Aplastic crisis;
- Skeletal abnormalities.
fig.8
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS WITH INTRA-GLOBULAR DEFECTS
I
NTRINSIC DEFECTS IN THE RED CELL MEMBRANE
The shape and the elasticity of the RBC are guaranteed by the structure of the plasma membrane and by
proteins located just below the plasma membrane, connecting the membrane with the cytoskeleton:
spectrin and ankyrin. The deficiency of one of these two protein does not allow the erythrocyte to maintain
the biconcave shape.
fig.9
Spherocytosis is observed through molecular defects of these proteins. The aberrant RBCs (spherocytes)
have a spherical shape, resulting less elastic and poorly deformable than normal ones, so they can die
intravascularly or they can be retained by the spleen and then destroyed through hemolysis by
macrophages.
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
18
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
Looking at a blood smear, they will not present the characteristic central pale area because they are not
biconcave but completely spherical, so they appear homogeneously pink.
It is an autosomal dominant inheritance with the highest prevalence in Northern Europe (1:5000)
● Patients affected by this disease can develop some complications:
● Hemolytic crisis: rapid worsening of anemia and jaundice, triggered by an infection.
● Aplastic crises: rapid fall in hemoglobin concentration precipitated by parvovirus B19 infection
Megaloblastic crisis: worsening anemia resulting from severe Folate deficiency caused by
● increased bone marrow requirement in hemolysis.
● Skeletal abnormalities
Leg ulcers
fig. 10
Elliptocytosis is another type of anemia which is very similar to the one just described, the only difference
is that RBCs have an elliptic shape.
Acanthocytosis is another type of hemolytic anemia, and it is due to an increased amount of cholesterol
in the plasma membrane, which makes it less elastic.
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria is another type of hemolytic anemia, in which the malformation
of the membrane occurs in the totipotent stem cells, giving rise to erythrocytes, platelets, monocytes and
granulocytes with plasma membrane alterations that will cause hemolytic crisis, mainly during the night.
Clinical features:
- Anemia
- Splenomegaly
- Jaundice
Patients with HS can develop serious complications as:
- Hemolytic crisis: rapid worsening of anemia and jaundice, triggered by infection.
- Aplastic crisis: rapid fall in hemoglobin concentration precipitated by parvovirus B19 infection
- Megaloblastic crisis: worsening anemia resulting from severe folate deficiency, caused by
increased bone marrow requirement in hemolysis.
Other complications: pigmented gallstones, growth failure, skeletal abnormalities and leg ulcers.
C
LINICAL DIAGNOSIS
A 41yo white woman presented to the emergency department. She described fever, cough and exercise
intolerance, yellowish discoloration of her eyes, and pain in the left upper quadrant that had been ongoing
for three days. She had experienced three similar episodes in the past five years. Each episode resolved
completely after treatment with antibiotics prescribed by her general practitioner. She had no other
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
19
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
notable medical condition or family history.
She appeared pale and had scleral icterus. Her spleen was enlarged and palpable below the left costal
margin, firm inconsistency, and mildly tender on palpation.
● Examination of peripheral blood film revealed abnormalities in red blood cell morphology: marked
spherocytosis and polychromasia on peripheral blood smear
● Ultrasonography of the abdomen confirmed splenomegaly with spleen size of 16 cm.
The diagnosis is hereditary
spherocytosis, presenting a hemolytic
crisis.
In fig.11 is analyzed a blood smear:
spherocytes are the cells pointed by the
red arrows, while blue arrows point to
reticulocytes. Polychromasia
(reticulocytosis) is an important sign,
which helps to understand that the bone
marrow is functioning and has activated
a hyperplastic mechanism with the aim
to restore the normal amount of RBC.
fig.11
● The results of the laboratory investigations reported (fig.12):
● Reduction in hemoglobin concentration, as spherocytes are destroyed peripherally.
Increase of reticulocytes, because the bone marrow is trying to restore the normal amount
● of RBCs.
Increase in lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), an enzyme released by cells that undergo necrosis
● (due to the lack of functioning RBCs and so of a hypoxic condition of tissues).
● Increase in bilirubin levels, resulting from an increase in heme destruction.
Reduction in haptoglobin: this protein is very important and is considered a marker of
hemolytic anemia, it normally binds free hemoglobin. Keep in mind that, during lab analysis,
○ we measure the amount of free haptoglobin (not bound to heme).
In physiological conditions, we can detect a normal amount of this protein because
there is no free heme in the blood circulation and so haptoglobin will not bind
○ anything.
When there is hemolytic
anemia, lots of heme is free in
the blood. It will bind to
haptoglobin and so the
amount of haptoglobin
measured in the lab will be
smaller than normal.
fig.12
Therapy:
- If the patient is
asymptomatic, no treatment is
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
20
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
required
- Infections can precipitate hemolytic crisis in people with this condition
- Moderate/severe cases can require:
- Splenectomy
- Folic acid supplementation
- Regular blood transfusion, generally performed in young children.
In fig.13 two blood smear of:
Fig.13
fig.14: pathophysiology of HS
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
21
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
Defects in the haemoglobin structure 🡪 Sickle cell anemia
The RBCs acquire a peculiar sickle shape. It is the most diffused disease of this category.
It is a common hereditary hemoglobinopathy caused by a point mutation in the sixth codon of β-globin
gene that leads to the replacement of a glutamate acid with a valine residue (missense mutation).
fig.15
The mutation promotes the polymerization of deoxygenated hemoglobin, leading to red cells
distortion and consequently hemolytic anemia, micro vascular obstruction and ischemic tissue damage.
Structurally abnormal Hb is less soluble than the native protein, especially in the deoxygenated form,
it precipitates inside the RBC forming fibers that can damage the membrane.
Falcization (acquisition of the sickle shape) of the erythrocyte is not constitutive (the RBC of an
● affected patient are not all sickle shaped) but occurs under specific conditions:
● Hypoxia
● Increased acidity
Temperature rise
About 8% to 10% of African Americans, or roughly 2 million individuals, are heterozygous for HbS, a largely
asymptomatic condition known as sickle cell trait. The offspring of two heterozygotes has a 1 in 4 chance of
being homozygous for the sickle mutation, a state that produces symptomatic sickle cell disease. In such
individuals, almost all the hemoglobin in the red cell is HbS (α2βs2). There are about 70,000 individuals with
sickle cell disease in the United States. In certain populations in Africa the prevalence of heterozygosity is as
high as 30%
fig. 16
As we can see, the “sickle transition” does not last too long and does not excessively damage the
membrane. When the intracellular calcium concentration increases and an augmented excretion of water
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
22
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
and potassium takes place, the cell becomes dehydrated. It can be reversed when the RBC is relatively
young and is reoxygenated, at the end it will be again rehydrated. This cannot occur anymore when the
RBC has become senescent.
Irreversibly, sickle cells are destroyed mainly by the spleen and can also cause micro vascular occlusion
leading to ischemic events at the level of tissue like chest, bones, abdomen and can cause pain.
Clinical Features:
● Sickled cells
● Reticulocytosis
● Hyperbilirubinemia
● Vaso-occlusive crises, also called pain crises (hypoxic injury and infarction that cause severe pain in
the affected region. The most commonly involved sites are the bones, lungs, liver, brain, spleen,
and penis)
● stroke and retinopathy leading to loss of visual acuity and even blindness
H
EMOLYTIC DISEASE DUE TO RED CELL ENZYMES DEFECT
● The most important are two:
PK deficiency, due to the deficiency of the pyruvate kinase, an enzyme that is involved in the last
● phases of glycolysis.
G6PD deficiency (Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase) that leads to a disease called Favism.
G6PD is fundamental for the antioxidant response of cells. It is responsible for the reduction of NADP+ in
NADPH, which in turn is necessary for the conversion of oxidized glutathione into reduced glutathione (an
important antioxidant). The lack of this important antioxidant causes hemoglobin to be susceptible to
oxidative stress:
o It will detach from the heme
o It will precipitate in the form of Heinz bodies making the red blood cell rigid. In turn Heinz
bodies can also damage the membrane. This condition is also a hemolytic anemia.
Favism, the condition that develops, is characterized by the
presence of Heinz Bodies: membrane-bound precipitates, dark
inclusion bodies within red blood cells stained with crystal violet.
Moreover, the cells look as bite, they are the result of the splenic
macrophages plucking out the inclusion bodies. It is triggered
after the ingestion of fava beans and peas and some drugs (such
as Aspirin, sulfonamides, antibiotics, vitamin K). It is normocytic
and normochromic.
A blood smear: fig.17
The most important characteristic is the “Bite cells”:
are the result of the splenic macrophages plucking
out the inclusion bodies.
fig.17
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS WITH EXTRA-GLOBULAR DEFECTS
3 types:
o Antibody mediated destruction
o Resulting from trauma to RBCs
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
23
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
o From infectious, chemical and physical agent
fig.18
Antibody-mediated destruction: hemolytic disease of newborns
Immune hydrops or hydrops fetalis is a type of hemolytic anemia
caused by an autoimmune reaction against RBCs: blood-group
antigen incompatibility between mother and fetus, causing the
accumulation of edema fluid in the fetus during intrauterine
growth.
Specific case:
- mother Rh-
- father Rh+
- fetus Rh+
Generally in the first pregnancy it is not risky as the mother only
produces IgM (don’t cross the placenta), but for the following
ones, where IgG antibodies are formed (cross the placenta), it is.
This particular type of hemolytic anemia is caused by Rh blood
group incompatibility between mother and fetus: in particular, it
happens in Rh positive fetuses carried by a mother presenting a
Rh negative phenotype.
Intrauterine fluid is accumulated on the fetal tissues:
- It can be a generalised edema of the fetus (commonly known as hydrops fetalis), it is a usually lethal
condition.
- A more localised edema is compatible with life and usually occurs in the post nuchal area. In this
case it is known as “cystic hygroma”. The reaction occurs in second and subsequent pregnancies
from a Rh negative mother and a Rh positive father, when the fetus inherits the Rh antigens from
the father on its RBC.
From the slides:
Fetal RBCs can reach the maternal circulation only during the last trimester of pregnancy or during childbirth
itself, thus the mother becomes sensitized to the foreign antigens.
The initial exposure to Rh antigen (first pregnancy) evokes the formation of IgM antibodies.
Exposure during a subsequent pregnancy generally leads to the formation of IgG and the risk of immune
hydrops. D antigen is a major cause of Rh incompatibility. Concurrent ABO incompatibility protects the
mother against Rh immunisation because the fetal red cells are promptly coated and removed from the
maternal circulation by anti-A or anti-B IgM antibodies that do not cross the placenta.
Administration of Rh-Ig (Rhesus Immune globulin containing anti-D antibodies) at 28 weeks of gestation and
within 72 hours of delivery to Rh- negative mothers (first pregnancy or after abortions) significantly
decreases the risk for hemolytic disease in Rh-positive neonates and in subsequent pregnancies. Fetal
hemolysis caused by maternal-fetal ABO incompatibility (20-25% of pregnancy, severe in 1:200 cases). ABO
hemolytic disease occurs almost exclusively in infants of group A or B who are born of group O mothers.
Most anti-A and anti-B antibodies are of the IgM type and hence do not cross the placenta.
Neonatal red cells express blood group antigens A and B poorly. Many cells other than red cells express A
and B antigens and thus absorb some of the transferred antibody. For unknown reasons, certain group O
women possess IgG antibodies directed against group A or B antigens (or both) even without prior
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
24
13.03.2023 GAMBA L.2
sensitization. Therefore, the first born may be affected.
Consequences
- mild hemolysis, anemia.
- severe hemolysis causes hypoxic injury to all the body of the fetus, especially liver and heart, giving
rise to reduced production of the main plasmatic proteins, causing a reduction of oncotic pressure
and generalized edema.
From the slides:
→ Anemia.
If hemolysis is mild, increased red cell production may suffice to maintain near-normal levels of red cells.
However, with more severe hemolysis, progressive anemia develops and may result in hypoxic injury to the
heart and liver. Because of liver injury, plasma protein synthesis decreases, and levels of these proteins may
drop to as low as 2 to 2.5 mg/dL. Cardiac hypoxia may lead to cardiac decompensation and failure. The
combination of reduced plasma oncotic pressure and increased hydrostatic pressure in the circulation
(secondary to cardiac failure) results in generalized edema, culminating in hydrops fetalis
● Both the fetus and placenta are pale.
● Liver and spleen are enlarged.
● The bone marrow demonstrates compensatory hyperplasia of Erythroid.
● Extramedullary hematopoiesis in the liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and possibly other tissues such as
the kidneys, lungs, and even the heart.
● Presence in the peripheral circulation of large numbers of immature red cells, including reticulocytes
and erythroblasts (erythroblastosis fetalis).
● The most serious threat in fetal hydrops is CNS damage, known as kernicterus.
→ Jaundice
Jaundice develops since hemolysis causes the release in
blood of unconjugated bilirubin, which can pass through
the infant’s poorly developed BBB. Being water-insoluble,
bilirubin binds to lipids in the brain and, since the brain is
the organ with the highest amount of cholesterol, the
presence of bilirubin can damage the CNS, causing
kernicterus. The brain is enlarged and edematous and,
when sectioned, has a bright yellow color, particularly the
basal ganglia, thalamus, cerebellum, cerebral grey matter
and spinal cord.
Fig.19
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
25
