16.03.2023 GAMBA L.3
CONGENITAL AND GENETIC DISORDERS
The focus of this lesson will be some genetic diseases emphasizing the pathophysiology of the diseases, so
the molecular and cellular mechanisms. In the first part of the lesson, some rules of genetics about mutation
(point mutations, missense mutations…) will be defined.
I will not ask you to speak about point mutations or other general aims during the exam. However, we are
going to repeat them very quickly in order to revise them.
D
IFFERENCE BETWEEN GENETIC DISORDERS AND CONGENITAL DISORDERS
Genetic (or hereditary) disorders arise due to permanent changes in the DNA (mutations), that most of the
time are derived from one parent and transmitted to the germline, so they are familial.
Congenital disorders refer to all disorders already present at birth.
A genetic disorder can either be congenital, meaning that it is already manifested at birth, or it can develop
later in life, as in case of Huntington’s disease.
C
AUSES OF CONGENITAL DISORDERS
As fig.1 shows, around 70% of congenital disorders are due to unknown
causes. 20% are genetic, so hereditary. A small percentage of
congenital disorders are due to cytogenetic diseases, so abnormalities
related to chromosomes.
Then there are 2% due to drugs, chemicals, radiation; another 2% are
due to biological agents that can cause infections; then maternal
metabolic factors, trauma at birth and uterine factors that represent a
small percentage.
T
ERATOLOGY
Fig. 1
Teratology is the study of developmental anomalies of congenital disorders.
Teratogens are all the factors that can cause a congenital disorder, for example chemicals, drugs, physical
and biological agents, cytotoxic drugs, antiepileptic drugs, alcohol, heavy metals, thalidomide.
G
ENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TERATOLOGY
1. The susceptibility to teratogens is variable: depending on the genotypes of the fetus and of the mother,
there are people that are more susceptible to drugs, bacteria, and other teratogens. For example, fetal
alcohol syndrome is a syndrome that appears in the newborns when the mother is an alcoholic. In this
case not all the children of alcoholic mothers will manifest this syndrome, because it depends on the
genotype of both the mother and the fetus.
2. The susceptibility for the teratogens is specific for each embryological stage. There are specific periods
of pregnancy in which the fetus is more susceptible to specific teratogens. Mainly the first trimester of
pregnancy, when the most important tissues and organs are forming.
3. The mechanism of teratogenesis is specific for each teratogen.
4. The teratogenesis is dose dependent. The more the teratogen present, the more dangerous it is for the
fetus.
5. Teratogens induce death, growth retardation, malformation, and functional impairment.
Hojsíková Alžbeta, Saghafi Romina
27
16.03.2023 GAMBA L.3
Fig. 2 depicts the sensitivity to
teratogenic agents of specific
organs at different stages of
human embryogenesis. The first
trimester, so from week 0 to
week 12, is the most delicate. In
fact, the susceptibility is higher,
because in this semester the
CNS, heart, extremities, eyes,
genitalia, and auditory system
are created.
Fig. 2
T
HALIDOMIDE
Thalidomide is a teratogen that has been assumed by mothers as a sedative
drug in the early stages of pregnancy to counteract nausea in the 1960s. In
those years, it caused a lot of congenital disorders in newborns, and only
one pill, one dose of 50mg, was enough to cause embryogenic deformities
in 50% of pregnancies, especially if taken in the first trimester.
It mainly causes phocomelia (“focomelia” in Italian, “bambini focomelici”)
which is characterized by skeletal anomalies. The arms are short and
malformed, similar to seal fins. In rare cases, the limbs are completely
absent (Amelia). There may be defects of other organs, mainly at the level
of the ear and the heart, but the CNS is not affected, so there is no mental
deficit. This drug was banned in 1962 for the use of counteracting nausea
Fig. 3
in pregnancy.
However, thalidomide is still used in chemotherapy because it induces apoptosis and inhibits angiogenesis.
In cancer the apoptotic pathways are not regulated, so the neoplastic cells never die, but this drug is able to
induce apoptosis and cancer cells. Moreover, angiogenesis is fundamental for tumor growth and nutrition of
tumor cells, so its inhibition will stop the tumor from growing. As a result, inhibition of angiogenesis and the
induction of apoptosis leads to a reduction of the tumor mass. Due to these effects, also the teratogenesis
occurs.
F
ETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME
Fetal alcohol syndrome is another congenital disorder.
It is caused by increased and chronic consumption of alcohol during pregnancy, particularly during the first
trimester. The susceptibility to the alcohol intake by the mother depends on the genetic background of the
mother and of the child.
The less severe manifestations include clumsy movements, impulsive behavior, being underwight.
Among the more severe deformities there is microcephaly, malformations of the heart, limbs, joints, and also
mental retardation.
Fetal alcohol syndrome is the most common case of acquired mental retardation.
If only some of these alterations are present, it is only called fetal alcohol effect, not syndrome.
Hojsíková Alžbeta, Saghafi Romina
28
16.03.2023 GAMBA L.3
There are also some facial deformities that make this syndrome
phenotypically easy to recognize:
1. small and widely spaced eyes
2. thin upper lip
3. small nose, pointed upwards
4. receding chin
5. corneal damage
6. drooping eyelids
7. poorly developed midline of the upper lip (philtrum)
Fig. 4
T
ORCH COMPLEX
Torch is an acronym that stands for Toxoplasma, Others
(Syphilis, Parvovirus B19, hepatitis, HIV), Rubella,
Cytomegalovirus and Herpes simplex virus. These are the
main causes of this syndrome, and the main overall causes of
neonatal morbidity and mortality.
During pregnancy a toxoplasma test is done and if the mother
is negative for toxoplasma, she for example cannot eat
prosciutto crudo (raw ham) or unwashed vegetables.
The spectrum of symptoms is common for all the different
biological causes: lethargy, fever, feeding difficulties, anemia,
petechiae.
The most frequent are growth retardation, brain damage like
microcephaly or calcification, cataracts, conjunctivitis,
splenomegaly, and heart abnormalities (fig. 5).
Fig. 5
T
YPES OF HUMAN GENETIC DISORDERS
1. Monogenic diseases: They are related to mutations in a single gene. For example cystic fibrosis,
where the gene CFTR is mutated.
2. Chromosomal disorders: Arise from structural or numerical alteration in autosomes or sex
chromosomes.
3. Multigenic diseases: Also called polygenic or multifactorial diseases. They are caused by interactions
between multiple variant forms of genes and environmental factors.
4. Single-gene disorders with nonclassical patterns of inheritance: Caused by a mutation in a single
gene but they do not follow the Mendelian pattern of inheritance. For example, triplet repeat
mutations, which will be explained later.
T M
YPES OF UTATIONS
Mutations are stable, heritable changes in DNA:
1. Genomic mutations: The loss or acquisition of an entire chromosome (monosomies or trisomy).
2. Chromosomal mutations: Visible structural variation of chromosomes.
3. Gene/Genetic mutations
G
ENETIC MUTATIONS
Genetic mutations are due to partial or complete deletions of a gene, or more often mutation of a single
Hojsíková Alžbeta, Saghafi Romina
29
16.03.2023 GAMBA L.3
base:
- Point mutations
- Expansion of unstable trinucleotide repeats sequences, of triplets
- Frame-shift mutations: due to nucleotide insertion or deletion, and consequently all the sequence
of bases is shifted to the right or to the left, completely changing the DNA meaning
- Large deletions
Point mutations are the most frequent mutations. They can happen due to either a substitution of a base
with a different base, a deletion, so loss of a base, or an insertion of a new base. With deletions and
insertions, there are frameshifts.
P
OINT MUTATIONS DUE TO A SUBSTITUTION
This mutation happens when a single base is substituted with a different base. The genetic information is
encoded in codons, so triplets of 3 bases. Each codon codes for one amino acid (3 bases -> 1 amino acid).
Therefore, the substitution of a base may have 3 different outcomes:
1. Silent mutation: This happens when the substitution of the base
does not alter the meaning of the sequence. The new codon
codifies for the same amino acid as the old one.
Fig. 6
Generally, it arises due to the substitution of the third base. In
this case (fig.6) CCA, that codes for Proline, becomes CCC that still codes for Proline.
2. Missense mutation: When the substituted base changes
the meaning, so the code of the triplet, and another amino
acid is synthesized. It can be conservative if the new amino
acid does not drastically change the function of the overall
protein, or non-conservative if the function of the protein
Fig. 7
is changed due to this new amino acid.
In this case (fig.7) CTC becomes CAC and the codon that normally
codifies for Glutamic acid now codes for Valine. This is a missense
mutation that occurs in the globin-β that is a part of hemoglobin
present on the RBCs; this mutation gives rise to sickle cell anemia
(in Italian “anemia falciform”). RBCs assume a particular shape that
resembles a sickle (“falce,” shown in fig.8), and become rigid, which
can cause them to remain trapped inside small vessels where they
are destroyed. This is an example of hemolytic anemia. Fig. 8
3. Nonsense mutation: When the substitution of the base brings to the creation of a stop codon, so the
protein will be smaller and
Hojsíková Alžbeta, Saghafi Romina
30
16.03.2023 GAMBA L.3
Fig. 9 can be useful to revise some concepts.
Let's imagine a normal protein, composed of 4
amino acids (aa): Arginine, Leucine, Proline, and
Isoleucine. Every aa is codified by a triplet, so the
three bases of Arginine are CGG, Leucine is TTA…
Second line is a missense mutation, so a point
mutation with a substitution of a thymine with
cytosine. This substitution brings to the formation
of another triplet, TCA that codifies for Serine, and
the resulting protein is different.
The third line is a nonsense mutation, so a
mutation in which the substitution of thymine
with adenine brings to the formation of a TAA
codon, which is a stop codon. The protein that will
be synthesized will be truncated (shortened), and
most probably degraded.
The last two are examples of frame-shift
mutations.
The insertion of a single base leads to a complete
Fig. 9
shift of the meaning of the DNA to the right. So, if
the DNA codons are read, 3 bases at time, all the aa here are different: Phenylalanine, Threonine, Aspartate.
In the case of a deletion of the thymine base, the message is shifted to the left and the aa are Tyrosine,
Arginine and Leucine. The frame-shift mutations can have huge and devastating effects on the proteins, as
it drastically changes all the aa downstream from the mutation site, and thus the resulting proteins are
completely different.
P
OINT MUTATIONS DUE TO A DELETION OR INSERTION
If the bases that are deleted or inserted are a multiple of 3 there are no real differences in the DNA message,
because some aa are inserted or deleted but the others remain normal.
Fig.10 is an example of the deletion of 3 bases that
codify for Phenylalanine in the gene coding for CFTR – a
channel for chloride.
Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive disease in which
the main mutation is the deletion of Phenylalanine that
brings to the alteration in this CFTR protein. Due to this
mutation the protein is not able to reach the plasma
membrane after being synthesized. It is similar to the
native protein, but it remains trapped in the Golgi or ER.
Because of that, CFTR will be missing from the surface of
Fig. 10
exocrine glands, and the clinical manifestations of cystic
fibrosis are due to the lack of these channels on the surface of the exocrine glands.
Hojsíková Alžbeta, Saghafi Romina
31
16.03.2023 GAMBA L.3
If the bases inserted or deleted are not a multiple
of 3 (so 1,2,4…), it is a frame-shift mutation, so the
whole DNA information is shifted to the left or to
the right and lots of aa are completely changed.
In fig.11 four bases (TATC) are inserted, which
results in a frame shift to the right and the reading
frame is completely changed. This happens in Tay-
Sachs disease, which is a neurodegenerative
disease with lysosome accumulation in cells.
Fig. 11
T -
RINUCLEOTIDE REPEAT MUTATIONS
Another type of mutations are trinucleotide-repeat mutations, in which a codon is repeated too many times
in the DNA. In general, they involve repetitions of triplets which contain C or G. There are a lot of diseases
related to that mutation, for example Huntington disease and X fragile syndrome.
H (HD)
UNTINGTON DISEASE
HD, also called chorea of Huntington, is a rare neurodegenerative disorder characterized by a severe damage
of the cerebral cortex that also extends to the basal ganglia. It is an autosomal dominant hereditary disease.
It arises due to a pathological repetition of CAG triplets. In a normal brain, there are already 10 – 30
repetitions of CAG triplets, but sometimes these repetitions start repeating too many times later in life, which
will lead to the development of Huntington’s disease. The main clinical manifestations involve the alteration
of movements and balance, the patients move involuntarily and lose balance, which looks similar to dancing.
Neurodegenerative diseases in general arise due to an accumulation of proteins in cells, more specifically in
neurons, which leads to a progressive degeneration. This is true for HD, Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, ALS, or Tay-
Sachs.
The brain of patients with HD is atrophic, and looks smaller and lighter. This is
because of the death of neurons that are permanent cells, so once they are
dead, they cannot regenerate, and there is deficient brain tissue. (fig.12)
It is a genetic disorder but not congenital, so the patients are not born with it. It
manifests in patients from 30 to 45 years old and it is a chronic progressive
disorder that brings death around 15 years from onset.
Fig. 12
Nowadays there are tests able to measure the number of repeats of codons in Huntington disease, but there
are a lot of discussions about the ethical impact of these tests, because usually at the age of 30/40, people
already have children, and there is no cure for it.
CAG triplet codes for glutamic acid and when there is an expansion of the CAG triplet inside the gene, it codes
for a protein called huntingtin. Normally huntingtin is a ubiquitous protein in the body, mainly presenting at
the level of the brain, where it is neuroprotective (protects neurons from dying). However, in case of an
abnormal CAG repetition, the new huntingtin protein will have a long polyglutamic tract, which will cause
the protein to lose its neuroprotective properties and becomes toxic for the neurons. This neurotoxic
huntingtin will accumulate especially at the level of cerebral cortex and basal ganglia, leading to progressive
degeneration of these areas.
Hojsíková Alžbeta, Saghafi Romina
32
16.03.2023 GAMBA L.3
Q: Why is it accumulating specifically in cerebral cortex and basal ganglia?
A: We do not know. The research in HD is not as progressed.
Involuntary movements will affect
all body segments, so from a certain
point of progression, the clinical
manifestations will involve bizarre
grimaces, sudden movements of
the upper limbs, difficulty walking
(similar to a dance), difficulty
performing the most basic
movements necessary for everyday
life, dysarthria (difficulty speaking),
inability to swallow due to
uncoordinated movements of the
pharyngo-laryngeal musculature,
and dementia.
The more the disease develops, the
Fig. 13
more the cognitive functions and
the common movement abilities are affected. Fig.13 shows the age of the patients and the functional abilities
of the patient that start to decrease significantly at the age of 45. Moreover, there is an inverse relationship
between the number of CAG repeats and the age of the onset. The higher the number of the repeats is, the
earlier is the age of onset that involves abnormalities in muscle coordination, psychomotor and cognitive
functions.
After the pathological repetition of CAG, the toxic
huntingtin will first aggregate into oligomers, and then
into fibrils, which will precipitate inside the cell. The
aggregated toxic huntingtin accumulates both in the
cytoplasm and in the nucleus. The accumulation of this
abnormal huntingtin in the nucleus causes the
expression of genes that are not normally expressed in
neurons and cause mitochondrial toxicity, synaptic
dysfunctions, and axonal transport impairments. In this
sense they become more and more susceptible to
oxidative stress. When there is cell necrosis,
consequently there is also inflammation and with
inflammation comes oxidative stress, mainly because
of neutrophils. This oxidative stress becomes
dangerous, and it is a vicious cycle that leads to the
Fig. 14
progressive neurodegeneration and cell death.
Q: Why is the presence of these triplets not dangerous at the beginning?
A: Because if you have a small repetition the polyglutamic tract is not too long to cause an alteration of the
function, it is not sufficient to change the function of the protein.
As of January 2023, there are no approved disease-modifying treatment.
Hojsíková Alžbeta, Saghafi Romina
33
16.03.2023 GAMBA L.3
F
RAGILE X SYNDROME
Fragile X syndrome is another disease caused by the expansion of a triplet. In this
case the triplet is CGG, which codes for Arginine. The problem in this case is the
expansion of this sequence at the level of the FMR1 gene encoding for FMRP
(familial mental retardation protein). FMRP is important for neuronal
development, so same as huntingtin, it is a prosurvival, neuroprotective and pro-
developmental protein. When there is an expansion of the trinucleotide triplet
Fig. 15
inside the gene coding for FMR1, the protein becomes toxic, loses the ability to
protect neurons and this leads to mental retardation. The severity of the manifestations depends on the level
of the expansion.
It is a mutation specifically related to the X chromosome. The expansion of this triplet brings to two fragile
sites at the level of the long arm of the X chromosome - for that reason it is called fragile X syndrome. As the
mutation is located on the X chromosome, the transmission is x-linked, not following the classical Mendelian
inheritance. Moreover, it is a dynamic mutation, meaning that subsequent generations have greater genetic
damage.
Fig. 16
Fig.16 shows how a family tree can be affected in case of a male carrier. The first generation of children is
characterized by the fact that all the males are healthy, without any mutation present. Instead, the daughters
are normal but have the premutation inherited from the father, because the X chromosome of the father
goes to the daughter. They are not really affected because women have another healthy X chromosome from
the mother, and even in the affected chromosome from the father the repetition is not as high to cause the
syndrome. Talking about the children of a carrier daughter, the granddaughters have a higher expansion of
the trinucleotide, because over the generation this mutation increases, so they have a full mutation, but they
are usually normal, due to the presence of the other X chromosome. Only 50% of these females will be
affected, and only mildly. Instead, the grandsons have a fully mutated X chromosome, and they are affected
by the disorder, because they only have one X, in which there are two fragile sites in which Arginine is altered.
People with fragile X syndrome have some typical physical
characteristics, including a high forehead, a long face with a large
mandible, a large nose, thin or retracted lips, large everted ears, and
macro-orchidism in males.
They have also some behavioral characteristics, such as stereotyped
movements, atypical social development, shyness, and autism.
Fig. 17
Hojsíková Alžbeta, Saghafi Romina
34
16.03.2023 GAMBA L.3
FMRP is able to bind mRNA and transport this mRNA into synapses. If this
protein is mutated it is no longer able to bind mRNA necessary for the
synaptic function and for that reason the neurons die.
FMRP is most abundant in brain and testes and that is why these two organs
are affected the most.
Genetic diseases involving a mutation in only one gene are typically
Fig. 18
transmitted as either autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or x-linked.
A
UTOSOMAL DOMINANT DISORDERS
Autosomal dominant disorders manifest already in a heterozygous state, because only one mutated allele is
sufficient to cause the disease.
Fig.19 shows a model of inheritance in case of one heterozygous parent,
therefore affected by the disease. A mutation in one allele of the gene is
sufficient to cause the disease. Overall, there is a 50% probability to have a
healthy child, and 50% to have a sick one.
While if both parents are heterozygous and affected by the disease, there is a
25% probability to have two mutated alleles. This condition is usually, but not
Fig. 19
always, not compatible with life. This model of inheritance is later shown in
fig.22.
Some examples of autosomal dominant disorders are listed in fig.20.
Fig. 20
A
CHONDROPLASIA
Achondroplasia, “nanismo” in Italian, is the most frequent from a group of
genetic osteochondrodysplasias. It affects the development of chondroblasts of
the epiphysis of long bones. Achondroplasia is disharmonic dwarfism (“nanismo
disarmonico”), because the head is very big with a prominent forehead, saddle
nose, but the limbs are very short.
Fig. 21
Hojsíková Alžbeta, Saghafi Romina
35
16.03.2023 GAMBA L.3
The mutation is on chromosome 4, on a gene coding for the fibroblast growth factor receptor type 3 (FGFR3).
It is a receptor present on fibroblasts, and in case of its absence, fibroblasts cannot bind the growth factor.
It is not a structural protein, but a receptor protein that is lacking or not
functioning
Fig.22 is an example of both parents affected. There is a 25% probability to have
a healthy child, so tall and not affected, another 25% probability of death during
pregnancy, and 50% probability to have a child affected by disharmonic
dwarfism.
Fig. 22
It affects the development of chondroblasts of epiphyses of long bones. The
average height for affected males is 130cm, and for females it is 125cm. The intelligence is not affected at
all.
O
STEOGENESIS IMPERFECTA
There are some disorders
that are characterized by
mutations in genes coding
for structural proteins, for
example osteogenesis
imperfecta, Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome and Marfan
syndrome.
Osteogenesis imperfecta,
also called “glass bone”
disease, is another
autosomal dominant
disease. It is an autosomal
Fig. 23
dominant disorder characterized by mutations in the gene coding for type I collagen.
It has 8 types, but all are characterized by defective synthesis of type I collagen. The types depend on whether
the mutation of the gene causes a complete absence of the protein, or a defective function of
the protein. Type II is not compatible with life.
In osteogenesis imperfecta bones are too little, fragile, deformed, and multiple spontaneous
fractures may occur. Dental problems, ocular problems and hearing loss are also present. In
short, it impacts tissues rich in type I collagen (joints, eyes, ears, skin, and teeth).
M
ARFAN SYNDROME
Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by a mutation in the gene
coding for fibrillin-1, the name of the gene is FBN1. Fibrillin-1 is an extracellular glycoprotein
of the connective tissue which forms the microfibrils of the extracellular matrix, especially in
tendons and walls of big vessels. Therefore, in the case of a mutation, there will be problems
related mostly with the tendons, big vessels (aorta) and eyes. One third of the cases is caused
by sporadic mutations, arising de novo.
Fig. 24
There are different forms, phenotypes, and consequently different severity of the disease.
There are people that only manifest phenotypic characteristics, usually they are very tall with
Hojsíková Alžbeta, Saghafi Romina
36
16.03.2023 GAMBA L.3
long arms, hands, and legs. It can also be characterized by spider fingers, which are abnormally long fingers
and toes (shown in fig.25). The ligaments of the hands and of the feet are lax and hyperextensible. Spinal
deformities may be present, as well as deformities of the chest, such as pectus excavatum, in which the
sternum is deeply depressed and the pigeon-breast deformity, in which the chest is external. So the main
problems are related to the skeletal system.
However, it is important to recognize and diagnose Marfan
syndrome, for example in really tall people (basketball
players, volleyball people), as the problems related to Marfan
syndrome are not only related to the skeletal system.
Ocular changes are frequently present, for example a typical
Fig. 25
mark of the disease is the bilateral dislocation of the lens,
called ectopia lentis. Severe myopia or retinal detachment can also be present.
Most importantly, Marfan syndrome can cause cardiovascular lesions. Overall, aorta is very lax and fragile,
which may lead to a dilation of aorta and subsequently aortal aneurysm. This is the cause of death in around
30% of patients due to the internal hemorrhage and hypovolemic shock caused by the aneurysm. The therapy
consists of drugs that protect against aortic dilation, drugs against hypertension, or a surgical insertion of an
aortal stent.
Fig. 26
Normally, fibrillin-1 regulates the function
of TGFβ. When fibrillin is present, TGFβ is
trapped in fibrillin, and it is released only
when it is necessary. While in Marfan
syndrome, when fibrillin-1 is lacking, TGFβ
is overactivated (because it is free from
fibrillin), and it binds to the TGFβ receptor,
present on the surface of the plasma
membrane, stimulating the downstream
pathways (SMAD proteins and so on).
SMAD proteins translocate to the nucleus
and activate gene expression of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs). MMPs are overproduced and degrade the extracellular matrix. It is a vicious
cycle: lack of fibrillin-1 causes overproduction of MMPs which further degrade ECM.
E -D S (EDS)
HLER ANLOS YNDROMES
This is a wide spectrum of clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders
belonging to the autosomal dominant disorders. It is defined as a group of
diseases because there are different features of the disease depending on the
type of mutation. EDS belong is caused by a mutation on a gene coding for type
I, III and V collagen.
There are 6 variants of EDS. The affected tissues are those that are rich in
collagen: skin, joints, ligaments. The skin becomes hyperextensible, and the
joints are hyperflexible, as can be seen in fig.27.
Apart from these typical characteristics, there can be some other serious
consequences, since collagen is also present in organs. For example, there can
be hyperelasticity and fragility of the skin, delayed wound healing, joint
hypermobility and joint dislocation, rupture of arteries, intestines and uterus
Fig. 27
during pregnancy, eye injuries and blindness, skeletal deformities, and
Hojsíková Alžbeta, Saghafi Romina
37
16.03.2023 GAMBA L.3
periodontal diseases (loss of teeth within 30 years of age).
The most severe internal complications that may occur are the rupture of the colon and large arteries, ocular
fragility with rupture of cornea and retinal detachment and diaphragmatic hernia.
Because of these dangerous complications, it is important to recognize this disorder as soon as possible and
prevent the complications.
F H
AMILIAL YPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA
The main cause of familial hypercholesterolemia is a mutation at the level of the gene coding for LDL
receptors (LDLR), located on the surface of hepatocytes. Lipoproteins are the particles that carry lipids in
blood because lipids cannot freely flow in blood due to their hydrophobic properties. Lipids need to be carried
by proteins, otherwise they would aggregate immediately and form a lipid embolus.
In hypercholesterolemia there is a high level of LDL (low density lipoproteins) in blood. LDL are also called
“bad cholesterol,” because they carry lipids from liver (where lipids are synthetized) to the peripheral tissues.
If the level of LDL gets too high, they accumulate inside arterial walls, giving rise to atherosclerosis. On the
other side, HDL (high density lipoproteins) are also called the “good cholesterol,” as they carry lipids from
the periphery to the liver, where these lipids are recycled. Therefore, the more HDL a person has, the better.
And the more LDL a person has, the worse. It is called hypercholesterolemia, even though it is an increase in
LDL, because the main component of LDL is cholesterol. If the LDLR on the hepatocytes surface is not present
or not properly working, LDL are not taken up by the liver and they remain in the bloodstream. For this
reason, the levels of LDL are very high in those patients.
In familial hypercholesterolemia there are different clinical manifestations, from milder to severe. It is again
an autosomal dominant disease.
In heterozygous patients there are elevated plasma cholesterol levels even at birth (around 350 mg/dL),
tendon xanthomas (accumulation of cholesterol at the level of tendons) before the age of 30, early
atherosclerosis, leading to a coronary artery disease before the age of 40.
In homozygous patients the mutation is still compatible with life, but the manifestations are worse. The levels
of plasma cholesterol are higher (from 600 to 1200 mg/dL), the patients can have cutaneous and tendon
xanthomas, coronary atherosclerosis can occur even in pediatric age, and myocardial infarction even before
the age of 30.
Q: What is the correct concentration of LDL cholesterol?
A: About 120 mg/dL in normal people. In people with risk factors or subjects that have undergone a
myocardial infarction that take drugs to reduce cholesterol levels, the ideal concentration is 50 mg/dL.
This is what LDL looks like (fig.28). In the center there are
cholesterol esters, then cholesterol, phospholipids, and
triglycerides. The hydrophilic part surrounds the
hydrophobic center. A protein called ApoB100 wraps
around the LDL particle and can bind to LDLR on the surface
of the liver.
Fig. 28
Hojsíková Alžbeta, Saghafi Romina
38
17.03.2023 GAMBA L.4
GENETIC DISORDERS PART 2
F H
AMILIAL YPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA
It’s a disorder that can have many different causes.
Mutation of the gene coding for LDL receptor
The main one is a mutation at the level of the gene coding for the LDL (low density lipoproteins) receptor,
which is mainly located on the surface of hepatocytes and has the role of binding and keeping LDL out of the
circulation. This receptor is involved in the transport and metabolism of cholesterol, as LDL are the particles
that carry lipids in the bloodstream as they cannot freely flow in it due to their hydrophobic properties.
The LDL receptor is also present on the surface of the cells of the periphery, as LDL goes from the liver to the
periphery in order to bring cholesterol to the cells that synthesize steroid hormones, form new cell
membranes, or that may need it for other uses.
It is important to keep in mind the difference between LDL (bad cholesterol, takes cholesterol from the liver
and brings it to the peripheric cells) and HDL (good cholesterol, takes cholesterol from the peripheric cells
and brings it to the liver), which are different in the structure, even if both are lipoproteins that allow lipids
to flow in the blood.
Overall, familial hypercholesterolemia is due to the lack of the LDL receptor in hepatocytes and a
manifestation of high levels of LDL concentration on blood.
The physiological amount of LDL is about 120 mg/dL in normal people, while in people with risk factors or
subjects that have undergone a myocardial infarction that take drugs to reduce cholesterol levels, the ideal
concentration is 50 mg/dL.
Familial hypercholesterolemia is an autosomal dominant disorder so both heterozygous and homozygous
present the disease, with the homozygous manifest more severe symptoms.
In heterozygous patients have elevated plasma cholesterol levels even at birth (around 350 mg/dL), tendon
xanthomas (accumulation of cholesterol at the level of tendons) before age 30, early atherosclerosis (chronic
inflammatory disorder that arises at the level of the medium and big arteries, mainly caused by elevated
levels of plasmatic LDL, which penetrates in the intima of these arteries and forms atherosclerotic plaques
that cause occlusions).
In homozygous patients the levels of plasma cholesterol go from 600 to 1200 mg/dL, the patients can have
cutaneous and tendon xanthomas, coronary atherosclerosis and myocardial infarction even before the age
of 30.
Other mutations
Mutations of LDL receptors are the main cause, but there are other genetic conditions that can lead to familial
hypercholesterolemia.
For example, in 10-15% of hypercholesterolemia cases are mutations at the level of the gene of the
apolipoprotein B100 (Apo-B100), the protein that surrounds LDL.
Considering that LDLR on the surface of hepatocytes specifically recognizes Apo-B100, a mutation leads to
the lack of the binding between the receptor and the protein.
In other cases (2-5%) there can be a mutation at the level of the protein PCSK9 that regulates the recycling
of LDLR.
Treatment
To reduce the concentration of LDL in blood the drugs that are given are statins. Statins, however, have lots
of side effects. Some people can’t sustain their intake because of the side effects like muscle pain. For those
subjects there are some new drugs: specific antibodies against PCSK9. By binding PCSK9 these antibodies
prevent the recycle of the LDLR, which remains on the surface of hepatocytes, allowing to keep more LDL
away from the blood circulation.
Fiamma Cusumano, Samuele Scagliola
39
17.03.2023 GAMBA L.4
In the cases in which antibodies have to be administered, cardiologists aim to reach 50 mg/dL of LDL because
these patients are at risk of myocardial infarction.
Remember that LDL levels increase also due to a lipid rich diet, so a correction in alimentation would be
enough to bring LDL levels back to normal ranges.
LDL
STRUCTURE
(fig.1) In the centre of an LDL there are cholesterol esters, then
cholesterol, phospholipids, triglycerides.
All of them have to be carried in the bloodstream and to do so
they need the ApoB100, which is a protein that wraps around the
LDL particle and that can bind to LDLR on the surface of the liver.
fig.1 LDL receptors are also present in the brain, in the skin.
LDL
METABOLISM
Figure 2 depicts an hepatocyte with a LDLR, but it also
shows that the liver is able to create VLDL too (very low-
density lipoproteins), that are mainly composed of
triglycerides (the yellow part in the figure) and a small
amount of esterified cholesterol.
VLDL have 3 Apo proteins on their surface: ApoC, ApoB
and ApoE. VLDL are useful because triglycerides are used
by muscles for energy and by adipocytes for their storage
and this is possible thanks to the action of the enzyme
lipoprotein lipase that separates triglycerides from the
rest of the lipoprotein.
The consequence is the creation of IDL (intermediate
density lipoprotein) that have lost ApoC and are left with
only ApoE and ApoB. 50% of IDL goes back to the liver
where it binds the LDLR, which specifically recognizes
B100, and the components of these IDL are recycled.
The other 50% of IDL loses the remaining triglycerides
and becomes LDL.
HDL takes cholesterol from the periphery where it is in
excess, and it shuttles it to the hepatocytes where it is fig.2
recycled, starting a new cycle.
So, if the LDL receptor is not present on the cell’s surface, either of or hepatocytes or peripheric cells, or if
it’s present in lower amounts, LDL remains in the bloodstream.
In this figure (fig.3), it is possible to see LDLR on the
fig.3
surface of hepatocytes that bind LDL, clathrin-coated
vesicles are created, and they fuse with lysosomes. LDLR
is recycled, so it goes back to the surface, LDL is degraded,
APO-B100 is degraded in amino acids, and cholesterol
exits from the lysosome to reach the cytoplasm to be
recycled.
In order for the cholesterol to exit the lysosome two main
proteins present at the level of the lysosomes are needed:
NPC1 and NPC2 (NP stands for Niemann-Pick).
Once cholesterol reaches the cytoplasm, it regulates
several pathways as it has a lot of physiological functions.
Fiamma Cusumano, Samuele Scagliola
40
17.03.2023 GAMBA L.4
However, when cholesterol levels are too high, cholesterol inhibits the synthesis of cholesterol, with negative
feedback. In particular, it inhibits the main rate limiting enzyme for cholesterol synthesis which is HMG CoA
reductase and so the synthesis of cholesterol is reduced. Moreover, cholesterol activates the enzymes
necessary to create cholesterol esters.
Another way to inhibit cholesterol accumulation is the inhibition of the gene expression and synthesis of
LDLR. In this way LDLR are not synthesized ex novo and on the surface of hepatocytes the level of LDLR is
reduced.
=
Three separate processes are affected by the released intracellular cholesterol:
1) Cholesterol suppresses cholesterol synthesis within the cell by inhibiting the activity of the enzyme 3-
hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) reductase, which is the ratelimiting enzyme in the
synthetic pathway.
2) Cholesterol activates the enzyme acyl-coenzyme A: cholesterol acyltransferase, favoring esterification and
storage of excess cholesterol.
3) Cholesterol suppresses the synthesis of LDL receptors, thus protecting the cells from excessive
accumulation of cholesterol.
Q: So we have production of lipids other than cholesterol but we don’t have their secretion, right?
A: Yes, we have the production of other lipids but cholesterol is particularly able to regulate its own production
Depending on the type of mutation of the gene mutate, there are different outcomes (fig.4).
There are more than 150 mutations of the gene coding for LDLR.
They are sometimes responsible for the complete non-
expression of the gene, in this case the LDLR are completely
absent on the cell's surface.
In other cases, the protein is synthesized but it’s trapped in the
endoplasmic reticulum or Golgi apparatus, causing an
intracisternal retention. The final effect is the same as the non
gene expression one because even in this case we won’t have
LDLR on the surface. In these two cases the disease is severe.
There can be some other mutations at the level of the LDLR
gene that still allow the protein to be synthesized, to be
transported to the cell’s surface but the protein doesn’t work
properly. This might be due to an abnormal conformation of the
protein and the receptor can’t correctly bind LDL. In this last
case the disease is less severe. We can also have some other
problems dealing with the recycling of the receptor.
So the same disease can have different levels of severity.
fig.4
Q: How does the problem in the synthesis lead to hypercholesterolemia?
A: In hypercholesterolemia there is a mutation that leads to a lack of LDLR synthesis. If you don’t have LDLR,
on the surface of hepatocytes there will be no LDLR. So LDL are produced, they are in the bloodstream but are
not taken up by the liver. They remain in the liver leading to hypercholesterolemia.
Fiamma Cusumano, Samuele Scagliola
41
17.03.2023 GAMBA L.4
AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE DISORDERS
In the case of autosomal recessive disorders, the recessive pathological gene determines the disease only in
the homozygous state, meaning inheriting both pathologic genes,
while the heterozygous state determines a healthy carrier.
Figure 5 shows that if both the mother and the father are
heterozygous for the pathologic gene, they don't manifest the disease,
but they have a 25% probability to have a child that does manifest it
in the homozygous form (aa), 50% that it will be a healthy carrier (Aa)
and 25% that it will be a healthy subject (AA).
These are some examples of autosomal recessive disorders (fig.6). fig.5
fig.6
N -P T C (NP-C) D
IEMANN ICK YLE ISEASE
It’s an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorder characterized by mutations at
the level of two main intracellular transporter proteins:
- NPC1, which encodes late endosome/lysosome transmembrane-bound protein
- NPC2, which encodes a soluble protein
They both lead to the same process: the exit of cholesterol from the lysosomes. The functions of NCP1 and
NCP2 are different but they are interconnected. Even if just one of these two proteins doesn’t work, the
disease occurs.
In the majority of cases NCP1 is mutated (95% of cases).
Pathogenesis
Niemann-pick disease is a
neurodegenerative disorder that is
characterized by the loss of function in
either NPC1 or NPC2, which leads to the
accumulation of cholesterol and other
lipids in the late endosomal/lysosomal
intracellular compartment (fig.7).
So, cholesterol can’t be used for
membrane formation.
fig.7
Fiamma Cusumano, Samuele Scagliola
42
17.03.2023 GAMBA L.4
The main outcome arises at the level of the brain,
leading to neurodegeneration (fig.8), but NCP1
and NPC2 are present also in other tissues and,
as a consequence, cholesterol accumulates also
in the lysosomes of the liver and spleen, causing,
reduced life expectancy, hepatosplenomegaly,
and lung deficiency, so it affects all the tissues,
but mostly the liver, spleen and brain.
Niemann pick is also known as child Alzheimer
disease because it shares many features with
Alzheimer's disease, but in children.
In the transfer of cholesterol from LDL to
lysosomal membrane the lysosomes appear
fig.8
filled with cholesterol (fig.7).
NPC2 is a soluble protein that flows inside the lysosome, it is able to bind cholesterol and acts as a shuttle to
bring cholesterol to the lysosomal membrane where it finds NPC1.
NPC1 is a transmembrane protein with several transmembrane domains on the surface of lysosomes, it binds
cholesterol and it inserts it on the lysosomal membrane, allowing it to get out of the lysosome.
The loss of function in either NPC1 or NPC2 leads to the same result: cholesterol is trapped in the lysosomes.
The age of onset of NP-C is very early in life:
1. Newborn NP-C: liver disease at or soon after birth and causes early death, with erythroblastosis
fetalis;
2. Early and late infantile NP-C (0-6 years)
3. Juvenile NP-C (6-15 years)
4. Adolescent/adult NP-C (>15 years)
They are characterized mainly by neurological symptoms and visceral symptoms (in particular in children).
Neuropathological features
- Neuronal degeneration, due to cholesterol accumulation
- child Alzheimer disease*, Alzheimer's-like neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid beta accumulation in
the extracellular space. They are the two main histopathological features of this disease, at the level
of the cerebral cortex. Neurofibrillary tangles are present intracellularly, in the cytoplasm of neurons.
They are due to the hyperphosphorylation of tau protein, a protein essential for neurons because it
is responsible for microtubules stabilization. When tau is hyperphosphorylated, it detaches from
microtubules, accumulates inside the neurons and they die. Another histopathological feature is the
accumulation of amyloid beta accumulation in the extracellular space forming amyloid plaques,
which are neurotoxic and cause neurons’ death.
- Neuroaxonal dystrophy
- Demyelination
- Neonatal jaundice
- Hepatosplenomegaly
- difficulty in speaking and in swallowing
Clinical presentation
• Cerebellar ataxia (movements disorder in 85-90% of NP-C patients)
• Dystonia contributes to patient disability. it can either be focal (affecting hands, face, or upper limbs,
or more generalized). Dystonia tends to occur later than other neurological signs during the course
of NP-C.
• Psychiatric disorders
• Cognitive deficits, dementia (childhood Alzheimer’s)
*Niemann-Pick is a very rare disorder and there is not a cure for this disease, just like Alzheimer.
Fiamma Cusumano, Samuele Scagliola
43
17.03.2023 GAMBA L.4
The only known information is that in these children there are some lesions that are similar to the ones
present in Alzheimer’s disease and in other neurodegenerative disorders (eg. Lewy bodies typical of
Parkison’s disease can be observed in NP too).
This (fig.9) is an example of a little boy that was born without any symptoms, but was diagnosed with NP-C
disease and probably had mutations at the level of NPC1.
Since it is a progressive disease, symptoms started to arise at 3-4 years of age and they quickly got worse and
worse. At 9 years old he was unable to swallow and wheelchair-bound.
Unfortunately died at 10 years old.
fig.9
When you have a reduced presence of NPC1 or NPC2, the quantity of cholesterol in lysosome is increased,
while in the plasma membrane cholesterol is reduced.
Some studies have demonstrated that cholesterol inside endosomes is responsible for the increased
production of two proteins:
• APP → amino precursor protein, which will give rise to amyloid plaques)
• BACE → beta secretase, the main enzyme that cuts APP leading to the formation of amyloid plaques.
Some ongoing studies are trying to understand the pathogenic mechanisms leading to amyloid plaques and
neurofibrillary tangles.
Q: What are amyloid plaques?
A: They are accumulations of amyloid beta which is a neurotoxic protein produced starting from APP protein,
which is a transmembrane protein present on the surface of neurons. This protein is cut by different proteases,
it accumulates outside and it’s neurotoxic. It kills the neuron and inhibits the transmission of signals.
C F
YSTIC IBROSIS
It is an autosomal recessive disorder, also called mucoviscidosis. It is characterized by different mutations
at the level of the gene coding for CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator).
CFTR is an epithelial chloride channel protein present on the surface of all exocrine glands, both mucus
secreting glands and sweat glands.
Age of onset
Cystic fibrosis affects children, between birth and late childhood, and it’s very variable. It is usually said that
the average life expectancy is 30 years, but there are many different grades of severity depending on the
type of gene mutation so it’s difficult to predict the life expectancy. Some subjects have very severe cystic
fibrosis, while in others this disease is compatible with life.
Fiamma Cusumano, Samuele Scagliola
44
17.03.2023 GAMBA L.4
CFTR structure
This is a physiological CFTR (fig.10).
After gene expression, the protein goes through the
ER, Golgi apparatus and finally reaches the surface
where it has two transmembrane domains.
CFTR is present on the surface of all exocrine glands,
both in mucous and in sweat glands, but in these
two types of glands, it in the opposite way.
fig.10
Pathogenesis
In mucous secreting glands, CFTR regulates the passage of chloride from the inside to the outside of cells.
In parallel, CFTR regulates two other membrane proteins:
• ENaC (epithelial Na+ channel). It is a sodium channel that brings sodium inside the cell.
CFTR regulates ENaC by inhibiting it and sodium remains out of the cell. So outside there will be
sodium chloride salts, which bring water out of the cell. By doing so the mucus becomes normally
hydrated.
• ORCC (outwardly rectified chloride channel). It is another chloride channel activated by CFTR and it
has the same function as CFTR: to bring chloride out.
When CFTR is not present or is not working properly, as in the right side of fig.11, chloride can’t go out
anymore and it remains inside the cells.
Moreover, CFTR is not able to inactive ENaC channels so too much sodium goes inside the cells, followed by
water. Since water goes inside the cells, the mucous becomes very dehydrated.
Normally, as shown on the right of fig.11, CFTR is present and working, so chloride goes out and just a small
amount of sodium gets in (very thin arrow) because CFTR inhibits ENaC channels. Similarly, just a small
amount of water gets in. So outside we have sodium and water and the mucous will be normal, hydrated.
fig.11
In sweat secreting glands CFTR works in the opposite way (fig.12): chloride is taken up by CFTR. In cystic
fibrosis, since CFTR is not present or not properly working, chloride remains outside of the cell. This doesn’t
lead to problems at the level of the sweat gland itself, but the only important consequence is that the sweat
is very salty. This is important because it’s a way to recognize if a newborn might be affected by cystic fibrosis.
fig.12
Fiamma Cusumano, Samuele Scagliola
45
17.03.2023 GAMBA L.4
Mutations
There are different mutations
responsible for cystic fibrosis (fig.13).
The mutations might lead to the
complete absence of CFTR on the cell’s
membrane or there could be an
intracisternal retention in the ER or
Golgi. In these two cases the disease is
very severe. In some other cases CFTR
is only produced in less amounts so on
the surface you find CFTR but it’s not
enough to exert its function. This is a
less severe form of cystic fibrosis.
There could also be a normal amount
of CFTR present on the membrane but
it is not able to bind ATP correctly and
does not work.
fig.13
The main gene mutation (fig. 14) that leads to cystic fibrosis is the deletion of a codon in position 508: delta
phenylalanine 508. This deletion is responsible for the intracisternal retention of CFTR. It’s a very severe
form, so if phenylalanine is lacking, CFTR will still be produced but it will be trapped in the Golgi apparatus
and there will be no CFTR on the surface.
fig.14
In these pictures (fig.15) it is possible to find:
• normal CFTR in which chloride goes out of the cell
• absent CFTR in which chloride, sodium and water remain inside the cell
• non normal CFTR that allows the passage of just a small amount of chloride, water and sodium. The
mucous will be only partially hydrated.
fig.15
Fiamma Cusumano, Samuele Scagliola
46
17.03.2023 GAMBA L.4
C
YSTIC FIBROSIS IN THE DIFFERENT AFFECTED ORGANS OF EXOCRINE
fig.16
Pancreas
The term “cystic fibrosis” comes from cystic/fibrosis formation that
occur at the level of the pancreas.
90% of patients have pancreatic abnormalities (chronic pancreatitis)
because the mucous is so thick in the exocrine pancreas that it occludes
the pancreatic ducts bringing to atrophy of the exocrine glands and cell
necrosis.
Eventually necrosis induces inflammation (acute pancreatitis, that then
becomes chronic pancreatitis) and then there is an attempt to repair
the damage thanks to the activation of fibroblasts that secrete
extracellular matrix. As a consequence, fibrosis increases at the level of
the pancreas giving rise to cystic fibrosis (fig.16).
If the exocrine part of the pancreas doesn't work, pancreatic juices are
not produced and this leads to steatorrhea (abundant and smelling
excrements due to no fat absorption), growth retardation, nutritional
deficiency (lack of fat-soluble vitamins: avitaminosis A, D, K) and
squamous metaplasia of the lining epithelium of the ducts in the
pancreas.
This process only affects the exocrine portion.
Respiratory tract
At the level of the respiratory tract the mucus is particularly thick and
dehydrated (fig.17), the consequence is that there is a tendency to
develop infections that can lead to pneumonia. Recurrent bronchitis
and pneumonia are the main causes of cell death.
Pulmonary changes are observed in all cases of cystic fibrosis and they
are the most serious complication of the disease. There is marked
hypertrophy and hyperplasia of mucosal glands.
The insufficient hydration of the mucus and the consequent alteration
of the activity of the celia, determines the inability to effectively
remove the bacteria (eg. pseudomonas aeruginosa is the most
common pathogen).
fig.17
Gastrointestinal tract
The typical symptom is meconium ileus (in italiano “ileo da meconio”): an obstruction of the small intestine
in newborns. This is a way to identify a child that is affected by cystic fibrosis, together with salty sweat.
Meconium derives from the ingestion of liquids coming from the mother during pregnancies. If two or three
days after birth the baby is not able to evacuate, meconium is not released, exams have to be carried out
immediately in order to understand if the baby is affected with cystic fibrosis. Therefore, mothers and doctors
have to pay attention to this in the immediate postpartum.
Liver
Bile canaliculi are plugged by mucus material. Hepatic steatosis is not an uncommon finding in liver biopsies.
If this situation lasts for a long time, cirrhosis can develop.
This liver involvement is found only in 5% of patients with CF.
Reproductive system
At the level of the reproductive system, males have some peculiarities: congenital bilateral absence of vas
deferens or obstruction of the vas deferens by dense secretions that lead to infertility.
Fiamma Cusumano, Samuele Scagliola
47
17.03.2023 GAMBA L.4
There’s also the lack of some fat-soluble vitamins, due to steatorrhea, that lead to anovulatory cycles in
women, which can be a cause of infertility. Thick and adherent cervical mucus plug is also present.
Salivary glands
The salivary glands frequently show histologic changes similar to those described in the pancreas: progressive
dilation of ducts, squamous metaplasia of the lining epithelium, and glandular atrophy followed by fibrosis.
Treatment
There isn’t a definite treatment able to cure cystic fibrosis. The main forms of treatment are:
- Infection control: removal of pulmonary secretions and antibiotic therapy
- Prevention of spreading of infection by wearing masks
- Administration of pancreatic enzyme substitutes (before eating, patients need to get pancreatic
enzymes because the exocrine pancreas doesn’t work)
- Lung and liver-pancreas transplantation
Gene therapy
CFTR has been cloned. The transfer of the non-mutated gene encoding CFTR into cells of patients cultured in
vitro is able to correct the transport defect of chlorine and restore its normal functionality.
The professor mentions a couple of articles on gene therapy that she found on pubmed. These are the links:
• https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27662105/
• https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30873022/
I E M
NBORN RRORS OF ETABOLISM
There are many recessive disorders that are due to the
lack of key enzymes in metabolic pathways (fig.18).
Now phenylketonuria and alkaptonuria will be discussed,
these are two disorders related to the metabolism of
phenylalanine.
fig.18
P
HENYLKETONURIA
It is an autosomal recessive disorder in which there is a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), an
enzyme that transforms phenylalanine into tyrosine.
If the enzyme is lacking, tyrosine is not created, and phenylalanine accumulates in blood. This is why
phenylketonuria is also called hyperphenylalaninemia.
This disorder brings to CNS development alterations after birth because tyrosine is necessary for the
biosynthesis of catecholamines, so neurotransmitters that are necessary for brain development, a condition
called phenylpyruvic oligophrenia.
Moreover, affected children have very blonde hair and blue eyes because tyrosine is a key molecule
responsible for melanin production. These physical features are similar to those of albinism, in which the
enzyme that transforms tyrosine into melanin is lacking. In phenylketonuria this enzyme is present but since
less tyrosine sick people don’t produce much melanin.
Since this is an autosomal recessive disorder, the affected child has to be homozygous, and the mother will
for sure be heterozygous. During pregnancy the baby is able to use the PAH of the mother, while after birth
he can’t do that anymore
To sum up, in newborns there are:
• cerebral damage and mental retardation: phenylpyruvic oligophrenia
• light-colored skin, eyes and hair
The treatment consists in the elimination of phenylalanine from the diet, as it is present in all products from
animal origin. Therefore, patients need to take semi-synthetic formulations that have no phenylalanine and
are rich in tyrosine.
Fiamma Cusumano, Samuele Scagliola
48
17.03.2023 GAMBA L.4
Maternal phenylketonuria → elevated maternal phenylalanine levels during pregnancy are teratogenic, so
phenylalanine and its metabolites cross the placenta and affect specific foetal organs during development.
In order to avoid disorders in the embryo, maternal dietary restriction of phenylalanine has to be initiated
before conception and continued throughout pregnancy. Moreover, if the foetus is homozygous for the
mutation, the mother is administered with tyrosine.
Malignant hyperphenylalaninemia → these are some severe cases in which the dietary intake of tyrosine
and the elimination of phenylalanine is not sufficient. In this case there is also a malfunction and deficit of
tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4). Patients with malignant hyperphenylalaninemia cannot be treated by dietary
restriction of phenylalanine.
A
LKAPTONURIA
It is the first metabolic disorder to have been discovered.
Alkaptonuria is a recessive disorder caused by mutations in the gene coding for homogentisic acid oxidase,
an enzyme belonging to phenylalanine metabolism which normally degrades homogentisic acid into water
and carbon dioxide. As a consequence, in alkaptonuria there is an accumulation of homogentisic acid
(alkapton).
Alkaptonuria leads to (fig.19):
- Dark urine due to presence of akapton inside
- Generalized pigmentation of nails, ears, skin, sclera
and blue cartilage tending to black
- Arthritis
It doesn’t reduce patients’ life expectancy.
fig.19
Fiamma Cusumano, Samuele Scagliola
49
