12.05.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.7
DEMYELINATING DISEASES
I
NTRODUCTION
There is a group of disorders, called demyelinating diseases, which are characterized by the loss of the
myelin sheath with the preservation of the axon. Because of the loss of the myelin sheath, there is the
appearance of several neurological deficits because all the electrical impulses cannot be transmitted along
the axons because the myelin sheath is necessary for the transmission. There are several pathologic disorders
that can cause this loss, for example immune-mediated destruction of myelin seen in multiple sclerosis but
also infections (for example bacterial) and a group of inherited disorders termed leukodystrophies (rare
diseases with a genetic predisposition characterized by the accumulation of substances on the myelin causing
its damage).
M S ( )
ULTIPLE CLEROSIS MS
It is one of the most common diseases characterized by an immune-attack which results in the destruction
of the myelin sheath. This disease occurs at any age but in 90-95% of the cases it occurs between 20-40 years
so maybe we can see the onset between 10-50 years or after 50 years of age. MS is a type of autoimmune
disease and is more frequent in women (as many other autoimmune diseases) affecting them 2-3 times more
than men. We can distinguish two forms of MS: a sporadic form (most frequent) and a form with family
predisposition (10-20% of cases).
Prevalence of 1 case per 1000
persons/year in Europe and USA; link
with unidentified environmental factors:
latitude, climate, etc. Incidence: 15-fold
higher when the disease is present in a
first-degree relative and roughly 150-fold
higher with an affected monozygotic
twin.
Here we can see (fig. 1) the distribution
of MS and it is quite diffuse in North
America, North Europe (Italy included)
and in Australia. It’s not so diffused in (fig. 1)
South America, Africa, India and Asian
countries.
As already said, it is an autoimmune disease, and it has been discovered that it is a multifactorial disease
because genetic and environmental factors can contribute to its development. It is characterized by the
presence of specific lesions caused by an autoimmune response directed against the components of the
myelin sheath which gets destroyed by our own antibodies, mainly in the area of the white matter of the
CNS, even though the gray matter can also be affected.
The demyelination is the result of repeated immune-mediated inflammatory processes over time; these
repeated crises, characterized by dramatic inflammation, are responsible for the production of antibodies
against the myelin responsible for all the neurologic deficits.
Saghafi Romina, Gervasio Carolina
81
12.05.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.7
The CNS tries to repair the damage but is not able to do it completely; thus, we have only a partial re-
myelination by oligodendrocytes; especially at the beginning the reparation is quite effective but over time
it becomes less effective and the result is the formation of specific lesions characterized by fibrotic tissue
known as sclerotic plaques. The name MS comes from the formation of multifocal sclerotic plaques.
On the left (fig. 2), there is a normal neuron with a totally myelinated axon and on the right, we can see the
situation after the immune attacks, and we can understand that the electrical impulses cannot be transmitted
along the axon with a myelin sheath in this condition.
(fig. 2)
F
ORMS OF MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
We can distinguish 4 different forms of multiple sclerosis:
● relapsing-remitting
It is a rapidly developing form; in a few days we have the appearance of the neurological deficits, and
this acute attack can be followed by a gradual, total or partial remission of the neurological functions
(80% of patients). We can have repeated attacks in the following months or years but between them
there are normal periods with regression of the neurological problems.
● secondary progressive
Over time some patients show a more or less severe progression of the disease, so it does not stop.
● primary progressive
We have a progression of the disease since the first day (so from the first day) and not over time;
20% of patients are affected by this more severe form compared to the others because we don’t
have a pause between the first and the second crisis but there is a constant progression of the
disease.
Saghafi Romina, Gervasio Carolina
82
12.05.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.7
● progressive-relapsing
Progressive condition with attacks; there is a progressive development characterized by more severe
attacks compared to the first form, so these patients reach a condition of disability because they
have very serious neurological deficits.
C F
ONTRIBUTION ACTORS
The mechanisms responsible for this disease are not clear but what has been demonstrated is that it is a
multifactorial disease so there is the involvement of:
● Genetic predisposition
− The genes of MHC class II are involved but only in 25-35% of cases, so this means that there are
also other genes involved. However, in particular patients with the haplotype HLA-DRB1*1501
have a higher risk (3 times more) of developing MS compared to other subjects. Since genes of
MHC class II are involved for only a small percentage, it means that other unknown genes must
be involved in the development of the disease.
● Environmental and immune risk factors
− It has been observed that this disease is present differently depending on the geographical area
due to different climate, latitude, etc. because these factors can stimulate in some way the
genetic predisposition.
− Vitamin D can also have a role in the development of MS and in particular a diet lacking
provitamin D or insufficient sun exposure.
− Cigarette smoking.
− Some studies said that probably some viral agents can contribute (maybe the Epstein-Barr virus)
but we don’t have reliable scientific data telling us which viruses are responsible and which are
not.
There are no reliable data on genetic, environmental, and immune factors but all the events able to stimulate
inflammatory processes can contribute to MS pathogenesis. It has been observed that chronic inflammatory
infiltrate (so chronic inflammatory cells) either inside the sclerotic plaques or outside the regions. Over time
the inflammatory response can decrease but the neurological deficits remain stable.
P
ATHOGENESIS
The pathogenesis (fig. 3) is characterized by a complex and multiphase process. We can mainly distinguish 2
phases: an autoimmune attack at the beginning and then, with the progression of the disease, an axonal
damage.
Saghafi Romina, Gervasio Carolina
83
12.05.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.7
(fig. 3)
At the beginning, there is a crisis characterized by inflammation during which there is the production of
cytokines and in particular of IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-alpha that starts to damage the endothelium of the blood
brain barrier causing the release of adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1, VCAM-1, E-selectin and the exposure
of MHC class II molecules implicated in antigen recognition by the immune system. After that there is the
activation of T-lymphocytes that start to express on their surface ligands for the adhesion molecules and for
MHC class II molecules and start to adhere to endothelial cells and transmigrate from the bloodstream to the
perivascular space, through the release of MMP-2 and MMP-9 that can degrade the components of the ECM
(in particular collagen).
These inflammatory cells cross the BBB and start to spread in the bundles of nerve fibers at the level of the
white matter of the CNS. Activated T-lymphocytes become cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CD4+) and start to
attack the myelin sheath proteins and produce inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-alpha)
stimulating macrophages and glial cells that synthesized NO and osteopontin (a glycoprotein). This is
considered as the inflammatory stage of MS. After that, the B lymphocytes start to migrate from the blood
to the perivascular space and they start to produce antibodies against the components of the myelin sheaths
and these antibodies are responsible
for the degradation of the myelin; the
macrophages present in that area
start to phagocyte all the fragment of
myelin. Osteopontin is a special
glycoprotein because it contributes
to the stimulation of the production
of other cytokines by Th1 cells
amplifying the inflammatory
response. So, at the end we have an
imbalance between the production
of inflammatory cytokines and the
anti-inflammatory cytokines released
(fig. 4)
by Th2 cells with the prevalence of
the inflammatory response.
Saghafi Romina, Gervasio Carolina
84
12.05.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.7
In this picture (fig. 4), it’s possible to appreciate the transmigration of activated T cells that attack the myelin
and the following arrival of B lymphocytes that start to produce antibodies against myelin components
degrading it; the degraded components are phagocytosed by the macrophages.
I C
NTRODUCTION ONSEQUENCE OF IMMUNE ATTACKS
We have many areas where the myelin is attacked in which we have the formation of focal areas of
demyelination on the myelin sheaths causing neurological deficits because, as already said, myelin is
necessary for the transmission of electrical impulses. During these inflammatory crises in the white matter
we also have the destruction of oligodendrocytes (because the myelin sheath
is formed by extensions of oligodendrocytes) and so these damaged neurons
start to release an excessive quantity of glutamate which is a neurotransmitter
that leads to a continuous excitation of neurons until they get exhausted and
so there is a destruction of the neurons because of the excessive excitation
that causes the loss of their functions, excitotoxicity (toxicity of neurons
caused by their extreme excitation).
Moreover, since there is axonal damage, the astrocytes and the other
inflammatory cells present around that area start to release some
neurotrophic factors trying to stimulate the production of new myelin with
consequent re-myelination by the oligodendrocytes, but this is only a partial
re-myelination; therefore, overtime this becomes less and less effective with
consequent irreversible damage and replacement by sclerotic tissue, sclerotic
plaques. In this picture (fig. 5) we can appreciate sclerotic plaques in the
brainstem and spinal cord.
(fig. 5)
A
NATOMOPATHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTIC
MS is an autoimmune disease characterized by sclerotic plaques typical of the white matter, but they can
also be present in the gray matter because myelin can also be inside it. These lesions have been observed in
the periventricular area, corpus callosum, cerebellum, but also optic nerves, chiasm, and spinal cord.
It’s possible to distinguish different types of lesions according to their morphology:
● acute active, associated with acute attacks of immune system; they are characterized by:
− irregular margins
− myelin infiltration of lymphocytes and macrophages (containing products of the sheath degradation)
− axonal damage however the axon is still conserved
− loss of oligodendrocytes which are destroyed
− poor astroglial response
● chronic active, associated with the progressive form of chronic MS; they are characterized by:
− sharper margins
− large external area rich in macrophages (mainly in the internal area) and products of advanced myelin
degradation
− evident axonal damage compared to the acute active ones
● slow expansion, they have an inactive central area surrounded by activated microglia and some
macrophages at the edges
Saghafi Romina, Gervasio Carolina
85
12.05.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.7
● chronic inactive, we do not have an active degradation of the myelin because these are old lesions
and correspond to the sclerotic plaques; they are characterized by:
− net margin
− myelin absence
− few oligodendrocytes
− macrophages and microglia cells but strong sclerotic cicatricial reaction (sclerosis, irreversible
damage) due to astroglial activation
S
YMPTOMS AND DIAGNOSIS
The clinical manifestations are various and change from person to person and can also be different because
they depend on the localization of the sclerotic plaques in the CNS. They occur singularly or simultaneously.
● if we have a lesion in the cerebral cortex, the neurological deficits will consist in motor, sensory and
cognitive disorders (paralysis, ataxia)
● if the lesions affect the optic nerve there will be optic neuritis and retrobulbar neuritis
● if we have lesions in the brainstem there will be ophthalmoplegia and dysphagia
● in case the lesions are in the motor spinal cord the neuronal deficits will be sensory and sphincter
disorders
As a result of the lesions the patients can have:
● Loss of sensitivity, tingling, numbness in the limbs (hypoesthesia and paraesthesia), loss of sensitivity
to touch, difficulty in perceiving heat and cold
● Muscle weakness, fatigue (asthenia), muscle spasms, difficulty in movement or difficulty in
coordination and balance (ataxia), language problems (dysarthria) and dyskinesias, swallowing
difficulty (dysphagia, as in other neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease and
Parkinson's disease)
● Cognitive impairment, cortical dementia, characterized by a state of euphoria or crisis of spastic
crying and laughing, depression
● Sexuality disorders, impotence and loss of sensitivity
● Visual disturbances, rapid visual decline, doubling of sight (diploidy), internuclear ophthalmoplegia
(force deficit or paralysis movements), uncontrolled movements of the eye (nystagmus) and optic
neuritis (image blur and pain in the region around the eyes or bulbar movement)
● Urinary tract disorders, frequent and/or urgent urination (pollakiuria), incontinence or retention
● Intestinal problems, constipation, diarrhea or fecal incontinence
The symptoms usually appear during the acute attacks and after these acute deteriorations there is a gradual
and/or progressive worsening of neurological function. The attacks are unpredictable so there are no obvious
factors that can precede them and do not occur frequently during the year → 1 or 2 attacks per year.
However, some are preceded by common triggers like hot environments; therefore, from one side the sun is
useful to produce vitamin D but on the other side it can cause the onset of an attack especially during spring
or summer. It also seems that some viral infections like common colds, flu and gastroenteritis, can increase
the risk of relapse while stress can trigger an attack. Pregnancy also plays a role influencing the susceptibility
to relapse (recurrence rate lower than one for each trimester of gestation); after giving birth, the risk of
recurrence is greater during the first months.
Saghafi Romina, Gervasio Carolina
86
12.05.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.7
As regards the diagnosis, with an MRI we can observe the lesions in the white matter but we can also check
the presence of antibodies against myelin or some fragments of myelin in the liquor by performing a liquor
examination. Moreover, there are two characteristic (but not specific) clinical signs of multiple sclerosis:
1. Uhthoff's sign, aggravation of existing symptoms due to exposure to higher temperatures than usual
ambient one
2. Lhermitte’s sign, sensation of electric shock that runs through the spine and legs following flexion
or, more rarely, during extension of the neck (this is typical of MS)
T
HERAPY
There are two lines of therapy:
● Immunomodulatory
Modulate and control the immune system decreasing the immune attack and thus the destruction
of myelin; the most used one is interferon beta-1 but there are also others (glatiramer acetate,
natalizumab)
● Immunosuppressant
These are the most effective drugs because they totally inhibit the immune system destroying all the
B lymphocytes responsible to produce the antibodies against the myelin components, but, after the
treatment, the patients are totally exposed to infectious agents because all the immune cells are,
indeed, destroyed. Officially approved drug for use in MS is mitoxantrone but many others are used
in clinical practice e.g. azathioprine and cyclophosphamide
The professor proceeded to show this video https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yzH8ul5PSZ8
Multiple sclerosis is a demyelinating disease of the central nervous system, which includes the brain and the
spinal cord. Myelin is the protective sheath that surrounds the axons of neurons, allowing them to quickly
send electrical impulses. This myelin is produced by oligodendrocytes, which are a group of cells that support
Saghafi Romina, Gervasio Carolina
87
12.05.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.7
neurons. In multiple sclerosis, demyelination happens when the immune system inappropriately attacks and
destroys the myelin, which makes communication between neurons break down, ultimately leading to all
sorts of sensory, motor, and cognitive problems. Now, the brain, including the neurons in the brain, is
protected by things in the blood by the blood brain barrier, which only lets certain molecules and cells through
from the blood. For immune cells like T and B cells that means having the right ligand or surface molecule to
get through the blood brain barrier, this is kind of like having a VIP pass to get into an exclusive club. Once a
T cell makes its way in it can get activated by something it encounters - in the case of multiple sclerosis, it’s
activated by myelin. Once the T-cell gets activated, it changes the blood brain barrier cells to express more
receptors, and this allows immune cells to more easily bind and get in, it’s kind of like bribing the bouncer to
let in a lot of people. Now, multiple sclerosis is a type 4 hypersensitivity reaction, or cell-mediated
hypersensitivity. And this means that those myelin specific T-cells release cytokines like IL-1, IL-6, TNF-alpha,
and interferon-gamma, which together dilate the blood vessels which allows more immune cells to get in, as
well as directly cause damage to the oligodendrocytes. These cytokines also attract B-cells and macrophages
as part of the inflammatory reaction. Those B-cells begin to make antibodies that mark the myelin sheath
proteins, and then the macrophages use those antibody markers to engulf and destroy the oligodendrocytes.
Without oligodendrocytes, there’s no myelin to cover the neurons, and this leaves behind areas of scar tissue,
also called plaques or sclera. In multiple sclerosis, these immune attacks typically happen in bouts. In other
words, an autoimmune attack on the oligodendrocytes might happen, and then regulatory T cells will come
in to inhibit or calm down the other immune cells, leading to a reduction in the inflammation. Early on in
multiple sclerosis, the oligodendrocytes will heal and extend out new myelin to cover the neurons, which is a
process called remyelination. Unfortunately, though, over time as the oligodendrocytes die off the
remyelination stops and the damage becomes irreversible with the loss of axons.
Just like other autoimmune diseases, the exact cause of multiple sclerosis is unknown, but is linked to both
genetic and environmental factors. Genetic risk factors include being a female and having genes that encode
a specific type of immune molecule called HLA-DR2 which is used to identify and bind to foreign molecules.
Environmental risk factors might include infections as well as vitamin D deficiency, which is an interesting one
because it might help explain why the rates of multiple sclerosis are higher at the northern and southern poles
compared to the equator where there’s a lot more sunlight. Together these genetic and environmental
influences might lead to the body not killing off immune cells that target myelin.
So it turns out that there are four main types of multiple sclerosis based on the pattern of symptoms over
time. To break this down, we can use this graph with time on the x-axis, where time refers to the lifespan of
the individual, and disability on the y-axis. The first, and by far the most common pattern of multiple sclerosis,
is called relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis or RRMS. This condition is what we just described, bouts of
autoimmune attacks happening months, or even years, apart, and causing an increase in the level of disability.
For example, during a bout a person may lose some vision, but then it may be followed by improvement if
there’s remyelination. Unfortunately, though, more often than not, the remyelination process is not complete
so there is often some residual disability that remains, and that means that with each attack, more and more
of the central nervous system gets irreversibly damaged. In the relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis type
there’s typically no increase in disability between bouts, so the line stays flat during that time. Now, the second
type is called secondary progressive multiple sclerosis or SPMS which initially is pretty similar to the relapse-
remitting type, but over time the immune attack becomes constant which causes a steady progression of
disability. The third type is primary-progressive multiple sclerosis or PPMS, which is basically one constant
attack on myelin which causes a steady progression of disability over a person’s lifetime. The final type is
progressive relapsing multiple sclerosis or PRMS, which is also one constant attack but this time there are
bouts superimposed during which the disability increases even faster.
Specific symptoms vary a lot from person to person, and largely depend on the location of the plaques. And
multiple sclerosis typically affects individuals between the ages of 20 and 40. Symptoms related to bouts can
typically worsen over weeks and can linger for months without treatment. One common trio of multiple
sclerosis symptoms is called Charcot’s neurologic triad and it includes dysarthria, which is difficulty or unclear
speech, nystagmus, which is involuntary rapid eye movements, and an intention tremor. Dysarthria is due to
Saghafi Romina, Gervasio Carolina
88
12.05.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.7
plaques in the brainstem that affect nerve fibers that control muscles of the mouth and throat, and this can
interfere with conscious movements, like eating and talking and can lead to things like a new stutter, as well
as unconscious movements, like swallowing. Nystagmus is due to plaques around the nerves controlling eye
movements. Plaques around the optic nerve cause loss of vision in one or both of the eyes because of damage
to the optic nerve, which is called optic neuritis. Sometimes there’s blurring or graying of the vision, or
alternatively there might be a dark point in the center of vision. Additionally, if there’s damage to the nerves
controlling eye movement, then eye movements can be painful and there can even be double vision, if the
eyes can no longer move in a coordinated way. Finally, intention tremors can be caused by plaques along the
motor pathways in the spinal cord which can affect outbound signals like skeletal muscle control. Motor
symptoms can include muscle weakness, muscle spasms, tremors, and ataxia which is a loss of balance and
coordination. In serious cases, this can lead to paralysis.
In addition, plaques in the sensory pathways can affect inbound signals like sensations from the skin which
causes symptoms like numbness, pins-and-needles, and paresthesias which are often a tingling feeling but
may also be a painful itching or burning sensation. Occasionally there can be very specific sensory symptoms
like Lhermitte’s sign, which is when an electric shock runs down the back and radiates to the limbs when a
person bends their neck forward. Plaques can also involve the autonomic nervous system which can lead to
bowel and bladder symptoms like constipation and urinary incontinence, as well as sexual symptoms like
sexual dysfunction. Finally, multiple sclerosis can also affect higher order activities of the brain, causing poor
concentration and critical thinking, as well as depression and anxiety.
Multiple sclerosis is typically suspected when there are multiple neurologic symptoms separated in space,
which is attributable to damage in different locations in the nervous system, as well as time, meaning
separate bouts or flare-ups as well as remission. The diagnosis of multiple sclerosis is supported by an MRI
which shows multiple central nervous system lesions, called white matter plaques, since these regions tend
to have lots of myelin. Also, in the cerebrospinal fluid there might be high levels of antibodies, which indicates
an autoimmune process. Finally a visual evoked potential can be helpful as well, which measures the nervous
system’s response to visual stimuli.
For treatment, there is no cure for multiple sclerosis, but there are medications which are particularly effective
for the relapsing-remitting type because they lessen the severity of relapses and make them happen less
frequently. Medications like corticosteroids, cyclophosphamide which is a cell cycle inhibitor, and intravenous
immunoglobulin can all be used to help blunt the autoimmune process. In addition, plasmapheresis can be
effective as well, which is when the plasma is filtered to remove disease-causing autoantibodies. Chronic
treatment for multiple sclerosis includes immunosuppressants like recombinant beta-IFN which decreases the
level of inflammatory cytokines in the brain and increases the function of T regulatory cells. Other
immunosuppressants actually block T cells from getting into the brain by interfering with their cell surface
molecules they use to gain passage through the blood brain barrier. Unfortunately, though, there are fewer
treatment options available for the progressive MS. Instead, treatments are often targeted at managing
specific symptoms—everything ranging from depression to bladder dysfunction. Physical therapy and
cognitive rehabilitation therapy can be particularly helpful with sensory, motor, and cognitive symptoms.
Finally, there’s also an increasing interest in the role of vitamin D as an effective treatment.
As a quick recap, multiple sclerosis is a chronic and progressive autoimmune disorder, and the most common
pattern is the relapsing-remitting type, where individuals have flares that come and go, with each one slightly
worsening their overall condition. During a flare, T-cells cause inflammation and damage to oligodendrocytes
in the central nervous system, which leaves behind scarred areas of demyelinated neurons called plaques,
which causes a variety of symptoms depending on the location.
Saghafi Romina, Gervasio Carolina
89
