20.04.2023 GAMBA L.7
DIABETES MELLITUS
G
ENERAL FEATURES
You have already heard about diabetes mellitus in other courses, I will explain more the pathophysiology
than the clinical part of it. The term comes from the Greek diabetes, meaning “to pass through”, and mellitus
meaning “sweet”. It is characterized by polyuria (big quantity of urine expelled) associated with glycosuria
(emission of glucose in the urine), so urine is sweet due to alterations of carbohydrates metabolism mainly,
but also proteins and lipids metabolism.
All the types of diabetes mellitus are characterized by a stable hyperglycemia, so high levels of glucose in the
blood that may be due to different causes, such as lack of insulin or insulin resistance. There are complications
over time, such as macro and micro-vascular diseases, we will see them in detail.
If hyperglycemia is too high, so higher than 180 mg/dL is associated with polyuria and glycosuria.
Fig 1
In this important paper (fig. 1) there’s a projection for 2045 to see how many cases of diabetes mellitus are
present nowadays and how many are expected to be present in 20 years more or less. In general, in the world
in 2021 there were 530 millions of people affected by this disease, while in 2000 they were only 151 millions.
In 2045 there will be 780 million.
Fig. 1 shows also the countries in which there will be a higher increase in the diabetes mellitus cases, they
are countries that are developing more and more, like Africa.
Endi Dingu, Elena Zeppegno
83
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.7
Fig 2 & 3
Here (fig 2) you can see in 2021 the diabetes mellitus prevalence by age and the fact that it increases with
age; the incidence in males and females is more or less the same.
Here (fig 3) you see the difference between rural areas and urban areas: in 2045 compared to 2021 there is
not so much difference in rural areas, the big difference is in cities. Of course, this is related mainly to the
diet.
C
LASSIFICATION
Diabetes mellitus can be classified into 4 main groups: type 1 and 2, diabetes for other causes and gestational
diabetes. We will focus more on the first two.
Type 1 diabetes in the past was called insulin-dependent diabetes (now it is more correct to call it just type
1 diabetes, because also other diabetes can be related to insulin, not only type 1) or juvenile diabetes
(because usually is diagnosed in children but keep in mind that it can appear later in life and not only during
childhood). Type 1 diabetes occurs in 10% of all diabetes cases, it is characterized by an absolute insulin
deficiency caused by destruction of the cells of endocrine pancreas producing it, the β cells. For this reason,
it is considered an autoimmune disorder. Insulin is a hypoglycemic hormone, and when it lacks it causes
accumulation of glucose in blood, so hyperglycemia.
There are two forms of this type of diabetes:
- Type 1A (immune-mediated diabetes mellitus): the autoimmune form of the disease
- Type 1B (idiopathic diabetes mellitus): a rare form with unknown etiology
Type 2 diabetes was in the past called insulin-independent diabetes (not correct anymore) and adult-onset
diabetes (because mainly occurs in adults and the elderly, but since diabetes type 2 diabetes is associated
with obesity, that is one of the main risk factors, and obesity now is very diffused also in young people, it’s
not correct anymore to call it that way). It is caused by a relative insulin insufficiency, it is produced by β
cells of the pancreas, but there is a sort of resistance, so cells of the periphery are not able to sense insulin:
insulin is not able to bind to its receptor and it’s not able to activate the transduction pathway.
The third class is diabetes mellitus from other causes, it can be caused by the removal of the pancreas
because of a tumor for example, pancreatitis so inflammation of the pancreas, pancreatic tumors, cystic
fibrosis, structural abnormalities of insulin, genetic defects in β cells and other causes.
Endi Dingu, Elena Zeppegno
84
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.7
Then there is the gestational diabetes mellitus, a diabetes that occurs in pregnant women. If the woman is
already diabetic before pregnancy, we speak about pre-gestational diabetes, which may be more severe and
dangerous for the newborn, because if it is not controlled it can cause malformations. The gestational
diabetes which occurs later during pregnancy is less dangerous, but it has to be strongly controlled in order
to avoid possible complications such as macrosomia of the fetus. Usually, this condition is completely
reversed after delivery. Gestational diabetes is a sort of insulin resistance, so it’s similar to type 2 diabetes:
insulin is still produced but it’s not able to act in the right way.
D
IAGNOSIS
The diagnosis of diabetes mellitus is made in the presence of the classic symptoms: polyuria (big amount of
urine produced), polydipsia (great thirst), unexplained weight loss (we’ll see that in diabetes there’s the
catabolism of lipids and proteins); and then a stable hyperglycemia, always documented in all types of
diabetes.
The basic tests to evaluate blood glucose levels are:
- Fasting Plasma Glucose (FPG), the measurement of blood glucose levels when fasting
- 2-hours Plasma Glucose (2-h PG), the measurement of glucose levels after 2 hours of the assumption
of big amount of sugar (75 g of glucose), called the OGTT (oral glucose tolerance test), in order to
evaluate how our body is able to use this glucose
- Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), we’ll see that the glucose in the blood if present in high
concentrations is able to bind to proteins, so proteins are glycosylated; so the measurement of
hemoglobin that has been glycated is a marker of hyperglycemia.
How is the OGTT, also called “load curve”, performed?
First of all, the fasting plasma glucose is measured in order to see the basal levels of glucose
in the blood; then the patient ingests 75 g of glucose and at different intervals the plasma
glucose is measured 2 hours after the OGTT test.
The healthy subject there will be, after the ingestion of 75g of glucose, a slight increase in
blood sugar that over time drops to the basal level.
The diabetic patient already starts from a higher basal level of glucose, then they
accumulate glucose in the blood and is very difficult to lose it, it remains in the blood.
Fig 4
This (fig 5) is a table which is very important for you
to know as medical doctors. In normal conditions a
healthy patient should have a FPG lower than 110
mg/dl, a 2-h PG after the intake of glucose lower than
126 mg/dl, and a glycated hemoglobin lower than
5,7% (percent meaning respect to the total
hemoglobin).
Diabetic patients will have a FPG higher than 126
mg/dl (it should be measured at least 2 times on
different days to say that it is a diabetic condition), a
2-h PG higher than 200 mg/dl, and a glycated
hemoglobin higher than 6,5%.
Fig 5
In the middle there’s a condition called impaired glucose tolerance, these patients will have a FPG between
110-125 mg/dl, a 2-h PG between 140-199 mg/dl and an HbA1c between 5,7-6,4%.
Endi Dingu, Elena Zeppegno
85
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.7
P
ANCREAS
The main hormones regulating glycemia are insulin and glucagon, and they are produced by the endocrine
pancreas, in particular in the islets of Langerhans.
The pancreatic islets are dispersed in the pancreas parenchyma, and there are different cells in them:
- β cells, the most abundant (80%), they are responsible for the production of insulin;
- α cells (15%), they produce glucagon;
- δ cells (3-5%), produce somatostatin;
- PP cells (1-2%), produce the Pancreatic Polypeptide hormone.
Let’s focus on insulin and glucagon.
Insulin is a hypoglycemic hormone: it is produced when there is a high concentration of glucose in blood, it’s
the glucose itself that stimulates β cells to produce insulin. Insulin stimulates the cells of peripheral tissues
to reduce its concentration in blood.
Glucagon has an opposite function: it is a hyperglycemic hormone, so it’s produced by α cells when there’s
a low level of glucose in the blood. For example, in the morning before breakfast, after fasting during night.
It increases glycemia by stimulating gluconeogenesis in the liver and glycogenolysis.
Fig 6
This picture (fig 6) shows you two immunohistochemistry: they are the islets of Langerhans, in brown (A
picture) you can see the β cells producing insulin, and here (B picture) the α cells producing glucagon.
G
LUCOSE HOMEOSTASIS
Glucose homeostasis is regulated by different processes:
- Gluconeogenesis, so the production of glucose in the liver;
- Glucose uptake by cells of the peripheral tissues, that have to use it as an energy source;
- Action of insulin and glucagon regulating the glucose uptaken by the periphery.
After an overnight fasting, low levels of glucose in the blood are present, so there is an increase in the
synthesis of glucagon (hyperglycemic) and simultaneously a decrease in the release of insulin. Glucagon
increases gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis (degradation of glycogen to produce glucose).
After the meal, the production of insulin is increased, and the production of glucagon is decreased. By this
way, insulin stimulates the peripheral cells to uptake glucose, decreasing the glycemia.
G
LUCOSE ROLE IN INSULIN RELEASE
Glucose itself has a role in the release of insulin. When you have hyperglycemia after a meal, so postprandial
hyperglycemia, the glucose stimulates the β cells to produce insulin.
Endi Dingu, Elena Zeppegno
86
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.7
Fig 7
Glucose enters the pancreatic β cells by diffusion through a channel called GLUT-2, and once inside the cell
it is used for glycolysis, so it is phosphorylated to Glucose-6-phosphate by a glucokinase and so on; at the
end you obtain ATP.
ATP inhibits the passage of potassium through the K+ channel: this brings to the depolarization of plasma
membrane, and the Ca2+ channels (which are voltage-gated channels, so are able to sense the
depolarization) open and calcium enters inside the cell. So, the result is that you have an increase in the
intracellular amount of calcium. The increase in calcium concentration is responsible for the release of insulin
by β cells.
Insulin secretion is not modulated only by glucose, but also other compounds like intestinal hormones called
incretins. These hormones are produced by the intestine when there are high levels of glucose in blood.
Two main incretins are known: GLP1 (Glucagon-like Peptide 1) and GIP (Glucose-dependent Insulinotropic
Polypeptide).
Incretins are able to increase the insulin production and simultaneously reduce the glucagon production;
then they have an important role in delaying the gastric emptying, giving a sense of satiety. This is what
happens physiologically.
In diabetic people, incretins are not functioning, or they are not produced: in general, the incretin effect is
attenuated. There are two new classes of drugs to restore the incretin function and mimic sometimes their
effect: there are agonists of the receptor for GLP-1, if GLP1 is not functioning and binding to its receptors
located in the pancreas and stomach, they’re similar to GLP1, and bind the GLP-1 receptor restoring the
normal function; inhibitors of DPP-4, DPP-4 is the enzyme that normally degrades incretins, bringing to
increase in their level.
I added this picture (fig 8) yesterday: this is a drug that is not
anymore available in pharmacies, because it is used a lot by
people who want to lose weight, and it is an agonist of GLP-1
receptor, inducing a sense of satiety.
Fig 8
A
CTION OF INSULIN AT THE CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR LEVEL
Glucose by entering to GLUT-2 stimulates the production of insulin by β cells of the pancreas. Insulin goes to
the periphery, maybe in muscles and adipose tissue, to give its signal in order to uptake glucose. How does
it act?
Endi Dingu, Elena Zeppegno
87
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.7
Fig 9
Insulin has specific receptors that bind it (fig 9). The receptor is composed of two α subunits, which are
extracellular, and two transmembrane β subunits.
α subunits have the binding site for insulin, while the β have the catalytic domain. After insulin binds the
receptor, there is a conformational
change in the receptor bringing to the
activation of the signal transduction
pathway that is responsible for the
uptake of glucose. As a consequence of
the activation of the signaling cascade,
we have the translocation to the
membrane of the GLUT-4: it is
responsible for the uptake of plasma
glucose, so glycemia is reduced.
So again, after a carbohydrate-rich
meal, you have an increase in glycemia,
stimulating β cells to produce insulin, as
we described before; insulin acts on target cells and induces glucose uptake. Fig 10
Q from a student: where does the glucose go after?
Answer: depends, glucose in the liver can be synthesized as glycogen, or it is used to produce energy for lipid
and protein metabolisms and muscle tissue, or as an energy storage in adipose tissue.
The main player in the pathophysiology of diabetes is of course glucose because insulin strictly regulates
glucose uptake, but it also regulates the lipid metabolism by inhibiting glycolysis (so stimulating glycogenesis)
and also protein metabolism.
Insulin, in order to be hypoglycemic, suppresses the hepatic gluconeogenesis and inhibits glycogenolysis, the
opposite of what glucagon does.
Endi Dingu, Elena Zeppegno
88
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.7
We see more in detail the insulin binding (fig 11) to the α subunit
of the receptor: after that you see the conformational change in
the receptor, so the β subunit containing the catalytic domain,
which has tyrosine kinase activity, is activated and it undergoes
autophosphorylation of the receptor. The autophosphorylation
of the β subunit is responsible for the activation of enzymes
present in the cytoplasm belonging to the IRS family (Insulin
Receptor Substrates). The enzymes will activate two very
important pathways, the MAP kinase pathway and PI3 kinase
pathway: these pathways bring to the translocation of GLUT-4
in the membrane, so that glucose is now able to enter the cell.
Fig 11
M
ETABOLIC EFFECTS OF INSULIN AND GLUCAGON
Fig 12
Insulin has many metabolic effects. The most known of insulin of course regards glucose, so in adipose tissue
and in muscles there is an increase in glucose uptake, but it also reduces gluconeogenesis and increases
glycogen synthesis, in order to be hypoglycemic.
Insulin is also able to regulate lipid and protein metabolisms: it is an anabolic hormone, so it increases lipid
and protein synthesis. In lipids, it is able to increase their synthesis but not directly: it inhibits lipolysis, so
lipids are not degraded and accumulate, and it stimulates the synthesis of fatty acids. In proteins, it
stimulates their synthesis in muscles. This is important to understand later the acute metabolic alterations
that occur in diabetes.
Glucagon is a hyperglycemic hormone, it stimulates glycogenolysis and lipolysis.
M
ETABOLIC ALTERATIONS IN DIABETES
If we consider the metabolic effects of insulin and glucagon, we can get what happens when insulin is not
present, as in type 1 diabetes, or it cannot act on target cells, as in type 2 diabetes. The stable hyperglycemia
present in all types of diabetes brings to a waste of glucose, it stays in the circulation and is not uptaken by
Endi Dingu, Elena Zeppegno
89
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.7
cells, and it binds to proteins glycosylating them (one of the main causes of chronic complications of
diabetes).
In healthy individuals, high glucose levels inhibit the release of glucagon. In diabetes mellitus, α cells are less
sensitive to glucose, so glucagon secretion is not inhibited, resulting in hyperglycemia, worsening the levels
of glucose in plasma (insulin not binding to receptors + insulin not inhibiting glucagon release).
T 1 D M
YPE IABETES ELLITUS
This type of diabetes in the past was called insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus or juvenile diabetes, because
of the frequent onset of this type in children. But now it has been seen that not only type 1 may be dependent
on insulin assumption, and it can be present also in adults and the elderly.
It is characterized by absolute deficiency of insulin, because of the destruction of β cells of the islets of
Langerhans. It’s more rare in respect to the other types of diabetes, they are 5-10 % of all cases of diabetes
mellitus.
There are two forms: type 1A and type 1B. The immune-mediated diabetes mellitus (1A) is the most
common, it’s considered an autoimmune disorder, and it is multifactorial: there is a genetic predisposition
but there must be some environmental factors activating it. The peak onset is during puberty, the 75% of
cases occur between 3 and 18 years old, the rest in older ages. It is characterized by stable hyperglycemia,
and in 10-40% of cases also by ketoacidosis, we’ll see later what it is.
Fig 13
In this picture (fig 13) you can see a graph: on X axis you have the age, on Y axis the β cells mass. There is a
phase between 5 and 10 years old that is considered a preclinical phase (called also the honeymoon period):
it means that β cells are actually destroyed, but they can still guarantee a sufficient insulin production
because of their hyper functionality (remaining cells producing more insulin than normal). The acute
metabolic alterations typical of type 1 diabetes (hyperglycemia, ketoacidosis, glycosuria, polyuria...) occur
when more than 90% of β cells are destroyed.
So, in most cases type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disorder. There is a genetic predisposition to this
disorder, but it is actually not sufficient for the onset of the diabetes. Some triggering factors are needed,
environmental factors that activate the autoimmune response against beta cells. When the autoimmune
response is activated, we observe insulitis, so inflammation of the islets characterized by lymphocytes
infiltrates and production of specific antibodies called ICA antibodies (Islets Cells Auto-antibodies).
Endi Dingu, Elena Zeppegno
90
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.7
Antibodies bind to insulin, so insulin is not able anymore to bind the insulin receptor. There can be also
antibodies against some specific antigens present on beta cells, that avoid the production of insulin.
There are some genes that can be involved in the genetic predisposition (you don’t have to remember them).
The important thing for you is to recognize the presence of polymorphism of the gene encoded for the
vitamin D receptor, so it may be involved in diabetic predisposition, or also mutations in the insulin gene
bringing to the creation of an insulin molecule that is not correctly formed, so it cannot bind to the insulin
receptors.
Genetic predisposition is not sufficient for the onset of type 1 diabetes, you need environmental factors that
can trigger the autoimmune response. These environmental factors may be viral infections or dietary
compounds, that in some people with genetic predisposition can trigger the immune response, such as
proteins from cow’s milk (especially albumins, proteins present on the surface of β cells): in some people,
the assumption of big quantities of bovine albumins can stimulate the formation ICA antibodies against these
albumins, because due to a molecular mimesis the bovine albumin, which mimics a protein of beta cells, is
recognized as antigen and attacked. Another possible environmental factor is the desegregation of antigens:
some viral infections can damage the beta cells (not kill, only damage), allowing the cells to expose in the
membrane some proteins normally found in the inner layer of the membrane, so they’re attacked by the
antibodies.
About the morphology of the islets of Langerhans in
diabetes type 1 just remember that due to the
destruction of beta cells we have necrosis of these
cells, and consequently an inflammatory reaction,
insulitis.
In this slide (Fig 14) you can see the little dots that
are the monocyte-lymphocyte infiltrate (with nuclei
occupying all the cell).
Fig 14
T 2 D M
YPE IABETES ELLITUS
Type 2 diabetes mellitus represents the 80-90% of all types of diabetes mellitus. In the past it was called
insulin-independent diabetes mellitus or adult-onset diabetes, but now is not correct because it occurs also
in children due to obesity, which is one of the main triggering factors today.
It is mainly characterized by insulin resistance; it is not able for different causes to bind on its receptor and
activate the signal transduction pathway. The other characteristic of this type is deficiency in insulin
secretion: there is a complicated interplay between insulin resistance and insulin deficiency, this is why we
cannot call type 1 diabetes insulin-dependent diabetes, because sometimes also type 2 patients may need
insulin. Another characteristic is an increased hepatic synthesis of glucose.
Also in this case is a multifactorial disease, there is a genetic predisposition, but the main trigger event is
obesity. These two factors bring together to insulin resistance and alterate function of β cells.
Endi Dingu, Elena Zeppegno
91
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.8
I
NSULIN RESISTANCE
Due to the presence of insulin resistance and not a complete loss of beta-cells in the pancreas, we only have
a relative insulin deficiency in type 2 diabetes and not a complete insulin deficiency as in type-1 diabetes.
Decreased peripheral insulin response mainly affects skeletal muscles, adipose tissue and the liver (most
sensitive to insulin).
There are three main causes of insulin resistance;
1) RECEPTOR DEFECTS - considered as a genetic predisposition. This is related to a mutation in the gene
coding for insulin receptors which can lead to a decrease in the number of INSR receptors on the
surface of beta cells or the correct number of receptors with mutations that alter their ability to bind
insulin. (Insulin is present but cannot bind to the receptors fig.1).
2) POST-RECEPTOR DEFECTS - In this case, insulin is
able to bind to the receptors, but the insulin signal
transduction pathways are impaired. Perhaps
mutations in the receptors can lead to alterations
in the catalytic tyrosine kinase domain of the
receptor or substrates of tyrosine kinases are
altered or mutations in genes coding for GLUT-4
could prevent the translocation of GLUT receptors
to the membrane or GLUT-4 is translocated to the
membrane but due confirmational changes is
unable to uptake glucose.
Fig. 1
3) REDUCED INSULIN SENSITIVITY – Here insulin is
produced, but is unable to bind to the receptors due to abnormalities of the insulin molecule.
The consequences of insulin resistance are;
- Failure to inhibit gluconeogenesis in the liver (elevated fasting glucose)
- Reduced glucose uptake (due to failure in GLUT-4 translocation) and glycogen synthesis in skeletal
muscle after a meal (elevated postprandial blood glucose)
- Failure to inhibit the activity of the "hormone sensitive" lipase in adipose tissue → excessive
degradation of triglycerides in adipocytes and an excess of circulating free fatty acids (FFA).
G F
ENETIC ACTORS
Genetic predisposition is greater in Type-2 Diabetes than in Type-1. However, the real risk factor together
with genetic predisposition of Type-2 Diabetes is obesity.
• Possible to recognize family history
• Homozygous twin concordance > 90% (in DM1 40%)
• Risk of transmission if both parents are affected > 50%
Some of the environmental/social factors that are related to genetic predistortion are;
- Obesity - in fact about 60-80% of DM2 patients are obese
- Sedentary life
- Unbalanced diet (diet rich in fats, especially saturated fatty acids, and sugars)
- Smoke
- Hypertension
In particular, abdominal obesity is the real risk factor because here the visceral adipose tissue produces a
variety of metabolically active factors (like specific adipose tissue cytokines which induce inflammation,
oxidative stress), some of which promote insulin resistance.
Jayamaha Tamasha, Zogheri Allegra
92
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.8
H ?
OW DOES OBESITY CONTRIBUTE TO INSULIN RESISTANCE
Adipose tissue produces specific inflammatory cytokines that are called adipokines → hormones produced
by the adipose tissue. The levels of these adipokines are regulated by a nuclear receptor called PPARγ
(Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor-γ). This receptor induces the increased synthesis of
adipokines.
Among these adipokines, there is adiponectin. Adiponectin favors insulin sensitivity in peripheral tissues.
Normally, in DM2 patients these levels of adiponectin are reduced and this mechanism promotes insulin
resistance fig.2
DM2 patients are given specific drugs called ‘Thiazolidinediones’, which are agonists of PPARγ and can
stimulate the production of adiponectin to improve insulin sensitivity.
In obese patients, there are elevated levels of free fatty acids and
these FFAs are shown to cause insulin resistance.
FFA bind to G protein-coupled receptors and interfere with the
insulin signaling pathway → alterations in the secretion of insulin,
incretins, and glucagon and promote inflammation.
Obesity also causes the release of some pro-inflammatory
cytokines (TNF, IL6…) that can induce insulin resistance.
In insulin resistance favored by obesity, the beta-cells produce
insulin which is unable to act. In the first phases of the disease,
there is a compensatory hyperinsulinemia. This means that the Fig. 2
beta-cells in the pancreas try to
compensate the insulin resistance by
producing more insulin. So, they are
hyperactivated.
However, at a certain point, they are
not able to produce a bigger amount
of insulin since insulin is altered and
the target cells aren’t able to sense the
presence of insulin.
These beta-cells eventually die and
undergo apoptosis (programmed cell
death) and not necrosis as in DM1.
Insulin resistance and beta-cell
atrophy is interconnected.
Fig. 3
M
ORPHOLOGY
There is no necrosis of pancreatic β-cells, nor morphological lesions in these cells in DM2. In some islets,
fibrous tissue fig.4 accumulates, even to the point of obliterating them. The protein amyloid produced by β
cells is often present in the islets, especially in patients over 60 years of age.
Jayamaha Tamasha, Zogheri Allegra
93
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.8
Fig. 4
A
CUTE METABOLIC ALTERATIONS AND CLINICAL FEATURES OF DIABETES
We will see some acute metabolic alterations, due to
lack of insulin activity, that are related to both DM1 and
DM2. As told before, the main characteristic is
hyperglycemia which is present in DM1 and 2, which
can lead to metabolic alterations.
In addition to hyperglycemia, diabetes mellitus is
characterized by a TRIAD, which is also indicated as the
‘illness of the 3Ps’. These are polyuria (increased
urination), polydipsia (excessive thirst) and polyphagia
(excessive hunger).
In addition to the TRIAD, there is asthenia (decreased
muscle tone) and diabetic ketoacidosis (if DM is
severe).
Remember that insulin not only regulates glycemic
metabolism, but also protein and lipid metabolism as
shown in fig.5.
As regards to lipids, the role of insulin is to inhibit
Fig. 5
lipolysis by inhibiting adipocyte lipase and favors
glycogenesis. At the same time, insulin favors protein
synthesis.
Loss of insulin function (insulin resistance) leads to consequences at the level of the adipose tissues and
muscles. At the level of adipose tissues, due to insulin resistance, there is no inhibition of lipolysis. Increased
lipolysis leads to the accumulation of free fatty acids. This is a form of dyslipidemia that is seen in DM patients
which can cause severe complications like atherosclerosis. As regards to protein, due to insulin resistance
there is reduced protein synthesis and an increased protein catabolism. Increased lipolysis and protein
catabolism leads to polyphagia.
In diabetic patients, the alpha cells of the pancreas are not sensible to hyperglycemia. So, glucagon is in
excess and this can lead to glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis which leads to the production of glucose
causing hyperglycemia. When there is hyperglycemia (more than 180mg/dL), glucose can also be found in
urine leading to glycosuria. Presence of glucose in urine can also lead to osmotic imbalance causing polyuria
(excessive loss of water). This can result in diabetic coma together with ketoacidosis.
Jayamaha Tamasha, Zogheri Allegra
94
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.8
D
IABETIC KETOACIDOSIS
This is caused due to the formation of ketone bodies fig.6,
which is composed of three components called acetone,
acetoacetic acid and β-hydroxybutyric acid.
These ketone bodies are produced in the liver due to increase
lipolysis starting from the release of FFA (non-esterified fatty
acids).
Accumulation of these ketone bodies in blood and urea leads
Fig. 6
to ketoacidosis. Acetoacetic and β-hydroxybutyric acid of
ketone bodies are the two molecules that are responsible for
the acidification of the pH.
Acetone, being volatile, in addition to passing in the urine, is eliminated with the exhaled air (rotten fruit
breath).
The clinical manifestations of ketoacidosis are;
- Fatigue
- Nausea and vomiting
- Severe abdominal pain
- Deep, labored breathing (Kussmaul breathing)
- Depression in cerebral consciousness
- Coma
There are different types of comas such as;
- DIABETIC COMA due to diabetic ketoacidosis.
- HYPEROSMOLAR COMA (HYPEROSMOLAR HYPEROSMOTIC SYNDROME, HHS) due to severe
dehydration resulting from sustained osmotic diuresis (polyuria).
- HYPOGLYCEMIC COMA - usually occur in DM1 patients
M -
ETABOLIC DERANGEMENTS UNDERLYING THE CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF DIABETES SUMMARY
1. Since insulin is an important anabolic hormone, its deficiency causes a catabolic state that affects
not only glucose metabolism, but also fat and protein metabolism.
2. ↑ Glucagon secretion promotes hyperglycemia (it stimulates hepatic gluconeogenesis and
glycogenolysis). Not only is the assimilation of glucose in the muscles and adipose tissue sharply
decreased or abolished, but also the reserves are depleted (↑ glycogenolysis).
3. The resulting hyperglycemia exceeds the renal reabsorption threshold → glycosuria. Glycosuria
induces osmotic diuresis and then polyuria, causing a profound loss of water and electrolytes →
severe dehydration → activation of the osmoreceptors of the thirst centers of the brain → intense
thirst (polydipsia).
4. Severe dehydration → hyperosmolar coma (hyperosmolar hyperosmotic syndrome, HHS)
5. Peripheral tissues are in a persistent condition of low glucose → protein and fat catabolism.
Proteolysis (skeletal muscle t.), releases «gluconeogenic» amino acids which are used as the building
blocks of glucose → asthenia → slimming (DM1). Insulin inhibits lipolysis so in the absence of insulin
there is catabolism of fats → release of non-esterified fatty acids and TG → loss of fat body mass
(DM1), hypertriglyceridemia and steatosis + hypercholesterolemia (dyslipidemia). Protein and fat
catabolism tends to induce a negative energy balance, which in turn leads to increased appetite
(polyphagia).
6. Excessive energy demolition of TG instead of glucose → free fatty acids reach the liver and are
esterified and oxidized (β-oxidation of fatty acids) (ketogenesis) → release of ketone bodies
(acetoacetic acid, acetone, β-hydroxybutyric acid) into the circulation = ketoacidosis (mainly in DM1).
Symptoms of ketoacidosis: nausea, vomiting, respiratory distress. Ketone bodies are eliminated in
the urine (ketonuria). If the acidosis is not compensated, it leads to diabetic coma and death.
Jayamaha Tamasha, Zogheri Allegra
95
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.8
7. Ironically, the most common acute metabolic complication in both types of diabetes is hypoglycemia
(meal skipping, excessive physical
activity, excessive insulin
administration). Dizziness,
confusion, sweating, palpitations
and rapid heartbeat; loss of
consciousness may occur if
hypoglycemia persists →
hypoglycemic coma. Reversal of
hypoglycemia with oral or
intravenous glucose prevents
permanent neurological damage.
Fig. 7
C
HRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Till now we have discussed about the acute alterations of metabolism in DM. So, polyuria, polydipsia,
ketoacidosis, etc... are all acute metabolic alterations of DM.
Now moving on to the chronic complications of DM, they consist mainly of diabetic macroangiopathy and
diabetic microangiopathy.
So, what are the causes of these chronic complications of diabetes?
The mechanisms responsible for these complications are;
- Formation of Advanced Glycation End Products (AGEs): - due to binding of glucose to proteins
- Activation of Protein Kinase C (PKC)
- Oxidative stress and disturbances in polyol pathways
- Hexosamine pathways and generation of fructose-6-phosphate
G
LYCOSYLATION OF PROTEINS
AGEs are Advanced Glycation End Products (AGEs) that are formed due to the bonding of glucose to the
amino groups of both intracellular and extracellular proteins nonenzymatically = nonenzymatic glycosylation
(or glycation) of proteins. This binding can lead to a permanent alteration of the protein and its functionality.
AGEs have specific receptors called ‘RAGE’.
Few examples of AGE include hemoglobin
bound to glucose forming glycated Hb in
blood, LDL apolipoprotein B (glycosylated LDL,
accelerated atherosclerosis). When LDL is
glycosylated, it is more pathogenic as it can
easily penetrate the intima of big arteries.
Another important example is the
glycosylation of the proteins in the basal
lamina which results in the alteration of the
endothelium. This glycosylation favors the
entrance of LDL and is the first step of the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.
Glycosylation of proteins is very
important in the pathogenesis of DM.
Fig. 8
Plasma albumin binds to the glycosylated basement membrane of capillaries contributing to the thickening
of the vascular wall seen in diabetic microangiopathy.
In fig.8, you can see how AGEs induce oxidative stress in the beta-cells of the pancreas and forms amyloid
plaques (toxic -> destroy beta-cells-> reduction of insulin production). This is just for your knowledge and is
not necessary to remember all these steps.
Jayamaha Tamasha, Zogheri Allegra
96
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.8
M M
ETABOLIC EMORY
At the first stages of DM, hyperglycemic memory causes the formation of some AGEs. Even if hyperglycemia
is corrected by diet, it still can form AGEs due to metabolic memory fig.9. This is because previously
accumulated AGEs remain in tissues and continue to be responsible for the chronic complications of diabetes.
• The engagement of RAGE by AGEs leads to sustained
cellular dysfunction, termed as “metabolic memory” → long- Fig. 9
term influence of previously accumulated AGEs that are
capable of maintaining RAGE over-expression, sustained
activation of NFkB, prolonged induction of tissue-specific
inflammation, initiation and progression of long-term
oxidative stress, which is persistent despite the reversal of
hyperglycemia.
• The phenomenon is associated with the pathogenesis of
diabetes-related macrovascular and microvascular
complications → impaired quality of life, accounting for
increased morbidity, disability, mortality.
As previously told, the two main chronic
complications of DM are diabetic
macroangiopathy and diabetic
microangiopathy.
MACROANGIOPATHY-> means alterations in
big arteries resulting in an accelerated
atherosclerosis. This can further cause
thrombosis, ischemia, stroke.
MICROANGIOPATHY-> results in alterations of
the small vessels like capillaries. It is
responsible for many complications like
retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy,
infections fig.10.
D M
IABETIC ACROANGIOPATHY
Here the arteries are modified making then
more susceptible to accelerated
atherosclerosis. This means that
atherosclerosis is premature and rapidly
Fig. 10
progressive.
The two main causes of accelerate
atherosclerosis in diabetic patients are dyslipidemia (due to high levels of LDL and low levels of HDL) and
glycosylation of proteins (like LDL, basal membrane proteins).
2 to 4 times greater incidence of coronary artery disease and fourfold higher risk of dying for cardiovascular
complications.
Diabetes is often accompanied by underlying conditions that favor the development of adverse
cardiovascular events (hypertension in 75% of individuals with DM2; dyslipidemia).
Atherosclerosis in diabetes is more aggressive than in the non-diabetic population, being premature, rapidly
progressive, and with the involvement of multiple arterial districts at the same time. There is also an impaired
function of cells involved in the maintenance of vascular homeostasis fig.11 (ECs, SMCs, stromal cells,
pericytes, inflammatory cells, circulating and tissue-resident vascular stem/progenitor cells) due to metabolic
alterations of DM.
Jayamaha Tamasha, Zogheri Allegra
97
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.8
For example, smooth muscle cells, which are in the tunica media, are important in atherosclerotic plaque
formation. They proliferate, migrate to the intima
and differentiate into fibroblasts to produce a
fibrous cap (EM) that covers the atherosclerotic
plaque.
At the same time, it has been demonstrated that
there are less EPCs (Endothelial progenitor cells) in
DM patients. These cells are involved in repairing
vascular damage. So, defects in the number of
circulating progenitor cells are associated with a
more rapid progression of vascular disease in DM.
There is also another group of cells called OPCs
(oligodendrocyte progenitor cells) which are
abundant in DM patients and they come from the
myeloid lineage (acquire some characteristics of
osteoblasts). They stimulate ectopic calcification of
the atherosclerotic plaque, which is another step in
the pathogenies of atherosclerosis.
Fig. 11
Acceleration of atherosclerosis in DM is mainly due
to AGEs. Below is a summary on how AGEs contribute to macrovascular complications.
- AGEs promote endothelial dysfunction → AGEs induce oxidative stress in endothelial progenitor
cells (EPCs) (EPCs contribute to re-reendothelialization, thus oxidative stress may hinder endothelial
repair). Additionally, AGEs decrease the activity of the oxidative stress scavenger’s catalase and
superoxide dismutase in ECs.
- AGEs contribute to foam cell formation → Due, at least partially, to the inhibition of cholesterol
efflux via ATP binding cassette (ABC) A1.
- AGEs promote intraplaque inflammation → AGEs induce macrophage polarization in the so-called
M1 phenotype. Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease.
- AGEs enhance proliferation of SMCs and synthesis of ECM.
- AGEs promote calcification → Vascular calcification results from the deposition of hydroxyapatite
minerals due to a phenotypic switch of VSMCs toward osteoblast-like cells. Calcification leads to
vascular stiffening and concomitant cardiovascular risk.
The presence of AGEs stimulates the progression of
atherosclerotic plaque. They cause a switch from a
stable to an unstable plaque fig.12.
In a stable plaque, the fibrous cap is thicker, necrotic
core is smaller and are not prone to rupture. But AGEs
favor the transition into an unstable plaque, which has
a thinner fibrous cap, thicker necrotic core and are
prone to rupture.
When the plaque ruptures, there is an immediate
formation of an acute thrombus, which that can be
responsible for a stroke when the carotid artery is
blocked.
When a non-occluding plaque obstructs a coronary
artery, it can cause angina. When there is an occluding
plaque due to the formation of a thrombus, it can lead
to MI (Myocardial Infraction).
Fig. 12
Jayamaha Tamasha, Zogheri Allegra
98
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.8
Another complication of macroangiopathy is diabetic foot. An atherosclerotic plaque leads to the
hypoperfusion of the foot which can cause inflammation and necrosis of the tissues(gangrene).
Peripheral atherosclerotic vascular diseases (especially lower limbs): claudicatio intermittens + gangrene and
ulcers of the lower limbs and fingers (diabetic foot) → amputations (40% of cases).
D
IABETIC MICROANGIOPATHY
Microangiopathy can cause alterations in microcirculation and this is again due to AGEs formation. There is
glycosylation of the proteins present in the basal membrane of the tunica intima of the arterial wall of the
microcirculation (capillaries of the skin, skeletal muscles, retina, glomeruli, renal medulla). It is the cause of
the reduced ability to heal wounds, typical of diabetics.
It also contributes to the onset of retinopathy, nephropathy and peripheral neuropathy.
D
IABETIC RETINOPATHY
It is a frequent cause of blindness in the general population and is most severe and frequent in DM1. This is
caused by neovascularization due to hypoxia-induced overexpression of VEGF (vascular endothelial growth
factor which is responsible for angiogenesis) in the retina. Treatment includes antiangiogenic agents. Diabetic
patients can also be affected with maculopathy, cataract, glaucoma leading to blindness.
D
IABETIC NEPHROPATHY
In case of DM1, 30-40% of patients experience renal failure, in DM2 it is 20%. It is the most common cause
of dialysis or renal transplantation.
Pyelonephritis (serious condition) = inflammatory picture due to the passage of urinary tract infections to
the kidney. Due to stagnation of urine in the bladder as a result of neuropathy + glucose in the urine
represents a rich growth medium for microorganisms.
Infections are very common in DM due to AGES formation, by binding to the proteins of the cytoskeleton of
inflammatory cells (neutrophil/monocyte/macrophage). This causes reduced neutrophil function
(chemotaxis, diapedesis, phagocytic activity, microbicidal activity) and impaired cytokine production by
macrophages. Therefore, infections are common in DM since there is a reduced defense mechanism and also
because the micro vessels, which are important in acute inflammation, are damaged (due to glycosylation of
basal lamina proteins).
D
IABETIC NEUROPATHY
Neuropathy can lead to an autonomic nerve dysfunction resulting in bowel and bladder motility disorders.
Diabetic neuropathy is responsible for the loss of tactile sensitivity. It can also cause:
- Distal symmetric polyneuropathy of the lower extremities that affects both motor and sensory
function.
- Alteration of axons, myelin sheath, Schwann cells.
- Microangiopathy of the vessels supplying the nerves contributes to the disease.
- Pain, but they have a high pain threshold so the diabetic tends to ignore minor irritations and traumas
to the toes, joints, lower limbs → ulcers.
- Paresthesias in the extremities.
T 3 A ’
YPE DIABETES AND LZHEIMER S DISEASE
In the last years, Alzheimer’s disease has been considered as Type 3 diabetes. This is because in the brain of
an Alzheimer’s disease patient there is some sort of insulin resistance.
Note that type 3 diabetes cannot be considered as another forms of diabetes as it something that is involved
only in the brain.
It manifests as insulin resistance within the brain with consequent impairment of central insulin signaling
processes → neurodegeneration, neurons aren’t able uptake glucose so they die.
Peripheral insulin resistance leads to decrease insulin signaling in CNS → increased Aβ toxicity, Tau
Jayamaha Tamasha, Zogheri Allegra
99
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.8
hyperphosphorylation, oxidative stress and neuroinflammation → neurodegeneration.
Insulin circulating in the blood can cross the BBB through a receptor-mediated active transport system +
insulin is produced in the brain. It has major potential to impact neurocognition and contributes to the etiology
of Alzheimer’s disease.
Alzheimer’s disease will be further discussed
later but what is important to know is that it is a
neurodegenerative disorder (means that there
is the accumulation of materials in cells).
Alzheimer’s disease like all the other
neurodegenerative disorders is a selective
degeneration which means that only some
particular areas of the brain are affected
(specifically the neurons of the cerebral cortex
and hippocampus). Other neurons remain
intact.
Neuronal death in the cerebral cortex causes
atrophy.
Fig. 13
Talking about the pathogenesis of
Alzheimer’s disease, there are two pathological causes which are neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid
plaques fig.13.
The neurofibrillary tangles are intraneuronal and are found inside the neurons. They are formed due to the
modification of a protein called ‘tau’, that is involved in the stabilization of microtubules. When this protein
is modified, it detaches from microtubules and aggregates in neurons giving rise to these tangles.
The amyloid plaques are extracellular and are formed due to the accumulation of amyloid beta, which is
neurotoxic causing the death of neurons from outside.
It has been shown that insulin resistance
(T3D) can cause amyloid plaque
accumulation and formation of
neurofibrillary tangles.
In fig.14, the mechanisms that occur in the
neuron are shown. Here insulin binds to the
receptor, then after a transduction pathway
there is a translocation of GLUT-4 to the
membrane that favors the uptake of
glucose.
This is a scheme of a Crosstalk Between
Brain Cholesterol Oxidation and Glucose
Metabolism in Alzheimer’s disease.
In the lesson dyslipidemias, we learnt that
alterations in cholesterol metabolism of the
brain can cause Alzheimer’s disease. Now,
we have seen that alteration in glucose
metabolism is also responsible for the onset
of this disease.
Fig. 14
M
ETABOLIC SYNDROME
It is a highly prevalent condition defined by the presence of at least three out of five risk factors including
central obesity, increased fasting glucose(hyperglycemia), high blood pressure (hypertension), and
dyslipidemia.
Jayamaha Tamasha, Zogheri Allegra
100
20.04.2023 GAMBA L.8
It is associated with a 2-fold increase in cardiovascular outcomes and a 1.5-fold increase in all-cause mortality.
These are the five risk factors that are used to diagnose a metabolic syndrome and if 3 out of these 5 are
present it can be diagnosed as a metabolic syndrome.
1) Central (abdominal) obesity, waist circumference > 94 cm in men and > 80 cm in women (Europe,
country-specific).
2) Hypertriglyceridemia (≥ 150 mg/ml)
3) Low blood levels of HDL cholesterol (< 40%ml in men and < 50%ml in women)
4) Systemic hypertension (≥ 130 / ≥ 85 mmHg)
5) Elevated fasting blood glucose ≥ 110 mg/ml (index of more or less marked insulin resistance)
Usually, a metabolic syndrome is characterized by a state of hypercoagulability of the blood (increased blood
levels of PAI-1: Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1). This is a risk factor for atherosclerosis as thrombus
formation is favored.
In fig.15, you can see how central obesity differs from region to region. Fig. 15
Jayamaha Tamasha, Zogheri Allegra
101
