22.03.2023 BIASI L.2
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
This lecture will talk about the main gastrointestinal diseases starting from the esophagus to the colon and
the rectum.
In general, the main pathologies interesting the esophagus are congenital pathologies, meaning that they
regard infants. There are two important features associated with the morphology of the esophagus: atresia
and fistula.
Atresia is the interruption of a part of the esophagus, while a fistula is associated with other organs, not only
in the esophagus but also in the gastrointestinal tract. Fistula is defined as the abnormal connection between
one organ that has a hollow structure and another organ. Speaking about the atresia in the esophagus, it is
in general congenital and can come with or without fistulae. It is a sporadic disease (although it remains the
most common congenital anomaly of the stomach) linked to soon birthing infants and ranges from 1 in every
2,000-3,000 births; the main symptom experienced by these infants is low weight. Nowadays, thanks to the
increase in the money in neonatal intensive care and the surgeons, there is an increase in the possibility of
these infants to survive.
E
SOPHAGEAL ATRESIA
Fig. 1
Atresias are classified into five main types, from A to E, with another additional type that is the F type. These
types are also linked to the severity of the disease, which is considered as II, III, IIIb, IIIa or H-type.
- Type A is only atresia, so there is a fraction. There is a complete block of the canalicular structure of
the esophagus, so we have atresia in the upper part and also in the bottom part;
- Type B presents an atresia in the bottom part and a fistula in the upper part;
- Type C is exactly the opposite, so the atresia is in the upper part;
- Type D presents two fistulae;
- In type E, there is a fistula between the esophagus and trachea without atresia. So, on the fistula
Scian Pier Paolo, Bertozzi Alice
11
22.03.2023 BIASI L.2
there is a narrowing of the trachea and a narrowing of the esophagus, with a fistula that is
concentrated in one part only without the atresia;
- Type F is the additional one, which is congenital and it induces a stenosis (an occlusion of the
esophagus).
What happens in the esophagus undergoing these different types of alterations (fig.2)?
Fig.2
There is a narrowing of the esophagus which is called esophageal stenosis, there can be an achalasia, an
ectopia or a reflux esophagitis.
Achalasia is a loss of peristalsis of the esophagus, due to the alteration in the muscles, meaning that the
esophagus is unable to maintain relaxation and contraction. The symptomatology of this achalasia is a pain
in the retro-sternal part.
Ectopia occurs when some residues from the diet, from the nutrients, are present; these types of residues
can be due to eating and can be due also to the presence of, in the case of chronic gastritis, of gastric mucosa
into the esophagus. The presence of gastric mucosa in the esophagus can induce also an alteration in the
morphology, associated with pre-cancerous conditions, for example the Barret’s esophagus. In general, it is
a kind of metaplasia when part of the tissue, in the case of the esophagus, becomes structurally like the type
of mucosa present in the stomach. Because the gastric mucosa is in the ectopic part, in the esophagus it can
produce acids like in the stomach and can induce the Barret’s esophagus, which is a metaplasia and can
become cancer, that’s why it is pre-cancerous.
There can also be a development in the symptomatology, very similar to ectopia, which is reflux esophagitis:
it is due to an alteration in the mechanism of contraction. So, there is also in this case the possibility of
developing Barrett’s esophagus.
Another cause of reflux esophagitis can be also
herniation, in particular, the hiatal hernia, which
causes a herniation of the stomach through the
diaphragm.
The hiatal hernia can be divided into different types
of morphologies (fig.3):
- Sliding hiatal hernia, which is when a part of
the stomach is inserted into the level the
diaphragmatic hiatus (so it can insert itself
towards the upper part, towards the
esophagus).
- Paraesophageal hernia (it is less common) is
when this herniation is a protuberance in the
Fig. 3
Scian Pier Paolo, Bertozzi Alice
12
22.03.2023 BIASI L.2
lateral part, also in this case for dilation of the diaphragmatic hiatus, so there is a kind of dislocation
of the gastric mucosa.
These two are the main types that we can see in the clinical practice. The other alterations are
particular:
- Acalasia corresponds, in this case, to the narrowing of part of this portion of the gastric mucosa.
This type of achalasia can also induce the formation of fibrous protrusions into the channel, which
are called Schatzki rings, where the mucosal part develops into the median part of the esophagus.
- The other alteration is the reflux esophagitis (fig.4) : as it has been said before, the reflux is due to,
in general, a metaplasia and therefore consists of a change of the type of tissue, and of the function
of the tissue, since the stratified squamous epithelium in the esophagus is replaced by the mucosal
columnar epithelium of the stomach to counteract the presence of the reflux and so the presence
of the acids that come from the stomach.
Fig.4, for example, shows a mild reflux of
esophagitis, in which these red cells are
eosinophils, and this tissue, that now is
still a stratified squamous epithelium is
completely changed with the mucosal and
columnar epithelium, like in the stomach,
with an increase also of eosinophils into
the tissue. And therefore, if this
esophagitis becomes chronic (and so if it
becomes a disease which is called chronic
gastroesophageal reflux disease), it can
induce Barret’s esophagus.
Fig. 4
Another type of damage into the
esophagus are the varices (fig.5 and 6).
The main esophageal varices sources are
the veins produced during a portal
hypertension. The fibrotic tissue is the
one that induces a narrowing of the
portal vein so, when there is a block in the
portal vein, it is an example of the
formation of collateral veins. Collateral
veins are collateral vessels that form
Fig.5
Fig.6
when there is an increase in the blood flow, which in turn lead to an increase in the pressure against the wall
of the vessels. These esophageal varices can be broken, and so the rupture results into the esophageal
bleeding.
S
TOMACH DISEASES
The stomach can be interested by different types of diseases: gastritis, which is the damage to the structure
of the stomach, for example due to a wound or ulceration (in this case there is a necrosis of the mucosa).
There can also be an obstruction of the gastric mucosa that can be due, for example, to the presence of
antigens or to the presence of a tumor. There can also be the so-called gastric constipation, consisting of a
sensation of feeling unease. There can also be a benign hypertrophy of the muscles at the level of the pylorus,
which can close the stomach (emptying it) and can close the passage of dietary compounds. Some particular
types of changes in the morphology, like dilation, torsion, a tumor, the alteration for different causes of the
Scian Pier Paolo, Bertozzi Alice
13
22.03.2023 BIASI L.2
motility of the muscles are associated with the ulcer.
G
ASTRITIS
Gastritis is an inflammation of the gastric mucosa, and, in general, is an alteration of the surface of the
mucosa: this causes an alteration in the production of mucins. Mucins are very important for the mucosa
because they protect it from suffering damages caused by the acid.
Gastritis can be due to different factors. We can have different types of symptomatology, depending on the
causes:
- Epigastric pyrosis, which causes a sensation of a burden on the stomach. When there is pyrosis, the
symptom can radiate to the back. So, when you are in the presence of a patient that has a pain on
the back, it is also possible that it can be due to gastritis.;
- Frequent belching and gurgling of the stomach that is due to the hyperproduction the gastric acids
- Nausea and vomit;
- Fever (only in the case of acute gastritis);
- Inflammation of the gastric mucosa is associated in general to the damage on the upper part of
the gastrointestinal tract, so on the esophagus. It can also be associated with a sensation of pain
also in the bottom, so it can also be associated with an alteration in the motility and the absorption
of the intestinal tract, so inducing diarrhea and abdominal swelling.
Gastritis is divided into two types, acute and chronic, depending on the duration of the disease and on the
amount of damage.
The acute gastritis has many possible causes, which can be:
- Ingestion of acid or basic substances (in particular aliphatic acids, which have a corrosive action).
- Ingestion of natural detergents (like lecithins for example) as they induce a physical damage of the
mucosa.
- Excessive alcohol intake, which can induces inflammation, edema and inflammatory infiltrates. It
can cause an erosion, so also a necrosis of the mucosa, and then an ulcer. In this case, the cause of
the excessive alcohol ingestion is called as alcoholic gastritis.
- Smoking .
- Chemotherapies also can induce damage to the mucosa.
- Helicobacter pylori, which is the only bacteria known to be a risk factor for gastritis. Helicobacter
pylori can be associated with acute gastritis but is especially associated with chronic gastritis.
- Some components which are very important in inducing acute gastritis, are drugs such as aspirin
(acetylsalicylic acid), and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The acetylsalicylic acid is,
obviously, an acid, so it decreases the pH, because it is dissociated, and induces an increase in the
acidity. This increase of hydrogen ions stimulates the release of histamine, and this in turn induces
an over-secretion of chloride acid, therefore there is an amplification in the production by the
mucus of chloride acid. All of these conditions can increase inflammation, so we can also see
edema in the mucosal layer. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs reduce the mediator of
inflammation, prostaglandins: their function is to reduce the production of mucus, therefore, if
there is a reduction of the mucus on the layer, it cannot defend itself from the caustic acids.
The evolution of acute gastritis is not only inflammation, but a massive wound necrosis that induces
hemorrhaging, because it is inserted in the deeper layers of the stomach and not only in the superficial
mucosa. The maximum evolution is the formation of this acute hemorrhagic erosive gastritis. Therefore,
remember, when there is a gastritis, do not give to the patient aspirin or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs. Cortisone and corticosterone are better than these anti-inflammatory drugs. That’s why, also, when
we need to ingest non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, we have to ingest them after eating: this is done
to defend the gastric mucosa from the effect of these drugs.
Scian Pier Paolo, Bertozzi Alice
14
22.03.2023 BIASI L.2
Chronic gastritis is a chronic inflammation classified into two types, specific and non-specific. Therefore, we
can sub-classify chronic gastritis depending on the morphology of the gastric mucosa.
Specific chronic gastritis is due to a specific cause, for example, a bacterial infection, and in particular,
Helicobacter. Among the different types of helicobacters, the main one which is responsible for chronic
gastritis is Helicobacter pylori.
The non-specific types of chronic gastritis are dependent on the morphology and the cells that are involved
in this inflammation:
- Lymphoplasmacytic gastritis is due to the infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells into the
lamina propria of the stomach, the deeper part of the mucosa;
- Eosinophilic gastritis, is due to the infiltration of eosinophils. This is in particular very rare and is
present in children or young people only;
- Granulomatous gastritis, where we can see a granuloma, a chronic type of inflammation where we
have a high quantity of inflammatory cells in general. This type of granuloma is associated with the
presence of another disease, an intestinal disease, called Crohn's disease.
When we have an intestinal disease, we also have a link to the other part of the gastrointestinal tract, which
is the stomach. When these repeated inflammations are present, there can be the damaging and necrosis of
an area of the stomach. The necrosis can be accompanied by inflammation and the formation of granulation
tissue, which is the tissue part of the wound repair. So, there is
a necrosis, there is a repair association, and therefore the
presence of the positional fibrous tissue, so the presence of a
fibrous reaction. This is called peptic ulcer (fig.7) . It is exactly
defined as a lesion characterized by a denuded mucosa, with the
defect extending into the submucosa and muscularis propria: it
is always accompanied by acid hypersecretion and, as I told you
before, the main risk factors are those that can reduce the
mucosal failure of the gastric mucosa in the stomach, which are
infection (for example from helicobacter pylori) alcohol and
Fig.7
tobacco consumption, acids, and non-steroidal drugs. The main among all these are non-steroidal drugs, anti-
inflammatory drugs, and helicobacter pylori infections.
The ulcer induces erosion which ion turn causes hemorrhages. Considering that there is also in this case, like
in Barret’s esophagus, an alteration in the function of these cells, this ulcer can be a risk for the development
of neoplastic transformation.
Fig.8
Fig.8 shows the normal mucosa, that is the upper part, which produces the mucus during chronic gastritis;
with injury, this mucus can be reduced and this reduction of the mucus induces the increase in the damage,
also in the deeper layers of the stomach. So, it can induce an alteration in the reduction of inflammation and
Scian Pier Paolo, Bertozzi Alice
15
22.03.2023 BIASI L.2
the formation of wounds, and so, ulcers in the deeper layers.
H
ELICOBACTER PYLORI
As we said before, helicobacter pylori is the main source of chronic gastritis, although it rarely can also cause
acute gastritis. The action of helicobacter pylori was discovered recently, only 10 years ago.
What is the mechanism behind chronic gastritis caused by Helicobacter pylori? Helicobacter pylori produces
urease, which is an enzyme that hydrolyzes urea into CO and ammonia. Ammonia is used by the helicobacter
2
pylori to maintain a basic environment around itself. On the other hand, the formation of CO in presence of
2
the hydrogen ions can produce an increase in the acidic environment of stomach cavity. So, it can decrease
the pH, and this acidic pH is able to cause damage to the stomach mucosa. In the meantime, the bacteria
defends itself by surrounding itself in an environment full of ammonia.
The different steps by which helicobacter pylori can induce damage are, first of all, the induction of an
alteration in the morphology and in the function of the stomach. So, it induces atrophic gastritis which can
also develop intestinal metaplasia. Intestinal metaplasia is a type of metaplasia when the tissue in the lower
part of the stomach changes its morphology and becomes like the first part of the intestine (the fundus of
the stomach becomes like the tissue in the tenue). There is also an alteration in the function of the intestine
and so an alteration in the digestion of the upper part of the intestine. This is a metaplasia that can spread
also in the lower parts of the intestine, which becomes colonic metaplasia: therefore the damage involves
not only the stomach but also the intestine. In fact, it can be assumed that helicobacter pylori can be also a
risk factor for intestinal damage. It causes dysplasia and carcinoma, in particular in the gastric portion.
Helicobacter pylori induces not only damage by increasing the acidic environment of the stomach, but also
because it expresses two types of proteins, which are VacA and CagA.
The first one is vacuolizing cytotoxin-associated protein type A (VacA), which is able to induce the damage
and cleave the membrane of the mitochondria. Between the two membranes of the mitochondria
(remember that mitochondria have an external membrane, an internal membrane, and then a matrix in
between) there is cytochrome C. If this external membrane is cleaved, cytochrome C is able to enter the
cytoplasm and activate the apoptotic program. So, there is this activation by this protein expressed by the
helicobacter pylori, which is associated with the induction of the damage, to the induction of apoptosis on
mucosa cells, to the amplification of the gastric lesions, and therefore the progression towards the malignant
phenotype.
The other protein, called cytotoxin-associated gene type A (CagA), expressed by helicobacter pylori,
activates the tyrosine kinases. These tyrosine kinases are kinases or enzymes that are increased during the
malignant progression because they are involved in the mitogenic response of the mucosal cells. Hence, in
this case, the expression of this gene by the helicobacter pylori is associated with the progression of gastritis
toward atrophy, and then cancer.
There are three types of tests to diagnose the presence of Helicobacter pylori.
Scian Pier Paolo, Bertozzi Alice
16
22.03.2023 BIASI L.2
The first type is the breath test (fig.9) , which is based on the
capacity of the helicobacter pylori to cleave urea into ammonia
and CO . If we give patients capsules that contain urea in which
2
the carbon is radioactive (to give radioactive urea), if they are
infected by helicobacter pylori, they exhale the radioactive CO
2
due to the cleavage, by the helicobacter pylori, of urea into
ammonia and CO . The CO reaches the lung and then when we
2 2
exhale the respiration, we can analyze the quantity of radioactive
carbon exhaled. This is a very simple test and it is the main type
of analysis.
Fig.9
Other types of analysis have been set up, like serological tests evaluating the immunoglobulins associated
with the infection of helicobacter pylori, like IgG, IgA, but this is a very generic serological test.
The other important specific test is the analysis of the presence of Helicobacter pylori in the stools, by using
an antibody against helicobacter pylori: this type of analysis is called Helicobacter pylori stool antigen test
(HPSA). The main one, however, is still the breath test.
Q: Why do you say that the serologic test is not so specific?
A: It is not specific because you are going to see only the amount of IgG or IgA, which may be increased also
due to other things.
Q: So cross-reaction?
A: No cross-reactions. For example, if there is an increase in IgA there can be an infection or an inflammation
associated with intestinal diseases.
Q: So IgG and IgA are not specific for helicobacter pylori?
A: No, you just see the spectrum of the different types of immunoglobulins and you see the presence of these
two.
I
NTESTINAL DISEASES
In the intestine there are different types of diseases. We can divide the diseases of the intestine into the
malabsorption syndromes in general (due to the alteration of the motility of the intestine) and into the
inflammatory disorders (due to ingestion of a particular type of food, the presence of cancer or chronic
inflammation): the two main inflammatory disorders are Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) and Inflammatory
Bowel Disease (IBD).
Talking about malabsorption syndromes, they can be due to the alteration in the absorption due to, for
example, alteration in the digestion of foods and in the transport throughout the different types of intestinal
layers, and also due to the reduction of the absorption area, causing malabsorption of the nutrients from the
portion of the intestine.
Which are these malabsorption syndromes? There is an increase in substances vaguely digested, which
induce the alteration in the ions and the production of mucins at the level of the intestine, especially the
tenue (in the upper part of the intestine). So, we have intestinal water influx due to the alteration of the
osmosis between the internal part of the intestine and the external part, where these vaguely digested
substances are present. There is also the enzymatic attack by bacteria, because of the presence of the
microflora in the lumen of the intestine. They are very important because they act by using their enzymes to
cleave or to metabolize particular types of nutrients that are ingested. But in the case of maintaining badly
digested substances, they can be altered by the bacteria and so they can induce the production of pro-
inflammatory molecules. So, these undigested substances can be cleaved towards the induction of
Scian Pier Paolo, Bertozzi Alice
17
22.03.2023 BIASI L.2
inflammation.
These malabsorption syndromes cause accelerated or reduced transit conditions: these alterations can
induce either diarrhea or stipsi (also called constipation). We have diarrhea when there is an acceleration of
the transit into the intestine and stipsi when there is a reduced transit into the intestinal lumen. These
changes can be due to the alterations in the contraction of the muscle layer of the intestine (there are a
mucosa and a muscular layer in the different layers of the intestine). These obstructions, these alterations,
can be due to, for example, be mechanical or functional damages.
In particular, the obstructions that can induce diarrhea or constipation can be present in the upper part of
the intestine, so in the small bowel. Why? Because small bowel obstructions are more common than large
bowel obstructions due to the diameter, the physical diameter of this upper part has a lumen that is smaller
Fig.10
than the large bowel. The obstruction can also be due, not only to
the physical presence of material, but also due to changes in the
morphologies of the intestine. In this case, it is an abdominal
hernia that induces an intrusion, due to a weakness of the wall of
the abdominal intestine; we can also have abdominal adhesions,
especially due to abdominal surgeries (fig.10). These intra-
abdominal fibrous formations are frequent and in general they can
link the peritoneal membrane and are due to abdominal surgery.
Fig.11
The other can be volvulus, when there is a twisting of one of
the segments of the intestine (hence, a segment becomes
twisted on itself) on the mesenteric axis. And this kind of
occlusion can induce an obstruction. The other one is
intussusception, due to an invagination of a part of buccal
part of the intestine (in the upper part of the intestine)
(fig.11). This type of invagination is due, for example, to the
alteration in the peristalsis, in the correct movement of the
muscles. So, these are due to the obstruction and these can induce malabsorption symptoms in general.
I (IBS)
RRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME
Malabsorption symptoms can be also due not only to physical obstructions, but also to inflammation of
segments of the intestine. The main inflammatory diseases are chronic inflammatory diseases in the
intestine, IBS and IBD. Irritable bowel syndrome is now considered also as chronic inflammation: only in the
last few years this type of disease has been considered a pathophysiological disease. In the past, this was
considered only a psychological disease. These patients suffer from abdominal pain, which can be
intermittent and they can experience stipsi with diarrhea (there is an intermittent alteration between
diarrhea and constipation). These types of diseases, like IBS, are now associated to have physiopathological
importance because the action between the gastrointestinal function and the brain function is now
physiologically considered: we have a link between the gut and the function of the central nervous system.
The condition that links these two tissues is in general is now called the gut-brain axis. Why was in the past
considered only as psychological damage and not physiological damage? Because these types of syndromes
develop in patients that are stressed. So, they develop especially in the so-called Western countries (in the
industrial countries), where the stress, due to the work and due to the lifestyle, is so high that can induce
stress into the brain. So, in this case, the psychological stress of the brain, is linked also to the malfunction of
the gut. On the other hand, if we have an alteration in the diet (for instance) and so we change, in particular,
the bacterial flora (and so there is an alteration in the microbiota) we can induce a functional damage to the
Scian Pier Paolo, Bertozzi Alice
18
22.03.2023 BIASI L.2
gut that is linked to the alteration of the brain. Hence, on one hand the diet and the change in the species of
bacteria, and on the other hand the stress of the civilization. Therefore, this type of syndrome is considered
to have different types of causes and is considered a multiple-probability disease. The main pathological
factor, therefore, is the altered gut immune activation due to the alteration of the bacteria present in the
gut, which are very important in our body. The increased intestinal permeability, the alteration of the junction
between enterocytes and the alteration, due to the diet, of the bacteria, but also due to the continuous
inflammation, the intestinal microbiota and the hypersensitivity of the patient. So this is an individual type
of sensation it’s not an objective factor but it is a subjective factor, and, therefore, there is the alteration of
the brain-gut interaction with an alteration in the autonomic nervous system which is in our intestine: this
nervous system is the nervous system of the gut that is able to activate some neurological transmitters, which
can be released and can reach the brain to induce alteration in the emotivity and the different type of
sensations of our brain.
R III IV
OME AND DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
To diagnose this type of syndrome we have two diagnostic criteria, which are ROME III and ROME IV (with
the latter being the most recent). They are very similar and are associated to the alteration of the sensation
for abdominal pain but also to the objective changes in volume of the feces, and the passage of the stools,
for example, throughout the intestine and so the motility into the intestine. Recurrent abdominal pain can
be a discomfort (an uncomfortable sensation), not described as pain but aa a sensation of feeling not well.
Following the Rome III criteria, this type of pain or discomfort has to appear at least three days per month,
in the last three months; type of damage must be associated with two or more of these factors, which are
the improvement of the condition with defecation, an onset associated with a change in the frequency of the
passage of the stool (for example diarrhea), and an onset associated with the change in the form (in volume
and in color) of the stool.
Following Rome IV criteria it is very similar, the recurrent abdominal pain, on average, has to appear at least
one day per week (not three days per month) in the last three months, associated with defecation and with
a change in the frequency of stool, number and volume of the stool.
Therefore, IBS is a multi-morbidity disease due to different types of symptoms associated also to the
behavior, and most of the symptoms are linked to both physiological (such as gut physiology) and
psychosocial factors. These two factors are linked by environmental factors: first of all is the change in our
lifestyle, in the type of eating, in the type of drinking, but also in the type of living, which is very important.
In fact, a gastroenterologist told the professor that there is nobody without inflammation like IBS. Only
children are not inflamed during our life, because otherwise our hormones are irritated.
Scian Pier Paolo, Bertozzi Alice
19
23.03.2023 BIASI L.3
INTESTINAL DISEASES PART 2
We now finish yesterday's lesson concerning intestinal diseases (IBD). Yesterday we saw the irritable bowel
disease that is quite different from inflammatory disease.
I
NTESTINAL INFLAMMATORY DISEASE OR INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
Fig.1
IBD are associated with chronic inflammation,
inducing symptoms of the chronic activation
(acute phase, pause and then relapsing). The main
cause probably is the alteration of the immune
response to the luminal antigens (all types of
antigens: dietary,nutrients, bacterias…)
The two most common ones are:
- Ulcerative colitis (UC)
- Crohn’s disease (CD)
They are characterized by chronic activation of inflammatory and immune cells, alternated by the remission
of the damage. So there is a tendency of having relapses and remissions of the disease, meaning times with
acute phase alternated by remission phases.
The prevalence of IBD has rapidly increased in Europe and North America in the second half of the twentieth
century and has become more common in the countries that have adopted Western lifestyle.
America was the first country to have this kind of disorder. Nowadays it is more prevalent in Europe, since
the USA are trying to change eating habits (Mediterranean diet ). This type of disease is associated with the
industrial environment and thus in a few years the other countries which are now at their industrial onset
will have these diseases. The increase in the quality of life induces also the other diseases, like these
associated to the immune defense alteration.
C UC CD
OMPARISON BETWEEN AND
They are both inflammations, but they differ because of the localization of the inflammation.
In ulcerative colitis
- Inflammation is in the rectum and can extend to the colon. It affects only the superficial layer of the
intestine (only the mucosa and submucosa)
- Complications (also in the case of CD) can be structures because they are implicated only in the
superficial layer.
- There are 2 peaks of onset, at 30 years old and the second one at 45 years old.
In Crohn’s disease
- inflammation can potentially involve all the tracts of the gut, from mouth to anus. It is not just
superficial but it also involves the deepest layers (mucosa, submucosa, muscularis mucosa and
muscle layer) and thus the complications are worse (necrosis or fibrosis)
- Complications are not only strictures, but also ulcers and, while trying to repair, fistulae.
- The onset is only one and in the range between 20-40 years old.
All these conditions are considered to be precancerous conditions, in fact the patients suffering from IBD
have a higher risk to develop colorectal cancer than normal subjects.
The extraintestinal complications (including peripheral arthritis that is the main complication and
hepatobiliary diseases that involve a direct damage of hepatocytes), especially for Crohn’s disease are really
important and affect more than 25% of IBD patients. So the therapy must regard not only the intestine but
the peripheral complications as well. Another important complication involves the nervous system. It is
associated probably with the gut-brain axis and associated with the behavior of the patient.
IBD, from a cellular point of view, is a chronic inflammation due to the inappropriate response of the immune
cells. There is a time of remission alternated with a time of exacerbation. Exacerbation is the increase in the
Umberto Geninatti, Fiamma Cusumano
20
23.03.2023 BIASI L.3
immune response and so also in the proinflammatory chemokines. Among the latter TNF alpha (tumor
necrosis factor) is the main one and there is an “explosion” of its production.
On the surface of the intestine we have mucus with a particular type of receptors for dietary compounds
(Toll-like and NOD-like receptors). They are on the surface of enterocytes or inside them and are able to
interact and recognize a huge variety of dietary compounds, bacteria, viruses and so on (part of the luminal
antigens ). These receptors have the function to present the antigens to immune cells on the basal
compartment of the enterocytes. During physiology these receptors can discriminate between “good
bacteria” and pathogens but also important molecules from toxic substances. So there is a continuous
balance between increasing inflammation and decreasing it.
C
OMPARISON BETWEEN PHYSIOLOGICAL AND CHRONIC INFLAMMATION
In the human intestine inflammation is a
normal and physiological phenomenon; the
normal mucosa is heavily infiltrated by
inflammatory cells. During chronic
inflammation the balance is towards the
proinflammatory chemokines or mediators
(most important is TNF-alpha, that is also the
target for the therapy involved in curing
these IBD diseases) compared to the anti-
inflammatory (produced by lymphocytes
them self to balance the inflammation)
(Fig.2). Remember that normally when there
is inflammation there are molecules called
resolvins which normally decrease
inflammation. Fig.2
E IBD
NTERIC FLORA AND PATHOGENESIS
Inflammation is more frequent in areas with higher bacterial concentration, due to the immune response
towards the bacteria in the lumen. During pathology there is an alteration in the ability of enterocytes to
recognize if those bacteria are pathogens or saprophytes. Thus there is a disbalance in the tolerance
response and immune cells recognize pathogenic bacteria or dietary compounds as toxic, when they are not.
There is no correct response. And everything in the intestine can induce inflammation. There is something
wrong in the response. Changing the dietary habits of the patient can help to avoid the acute phase of the
disease.
C IBD
OMMON CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS IN S
- Tendency to familiarity. In some populations, such as in Sweden there is a population with
variants/mutations in genes associated to the alteration of the response by the immune cells to the
materials that are in the lumen, but also to the dietary compounds (that activate them).
- Chronic intermittent course
- High frequency of extra-intestinal manifestations
- Marked efficacy for steroid treatment. Because the first type of treatment must be a steroid
treatment and NOT non-steroidal; thus it cannot be NSAID, aspirin, but it can be cortisone.
S
YMPTOMS
- Diarrhea with blood and mucus
- Abdominal pain
- Extra-intestinal manifestations
Umberto Geninatti, Fiamma Cusumano
21
23.03.2023 BIASI L.3
D
IARRHEA
It is characterized by more than 3 evacuations per day, otherwise it is not diarrhea. There is an increase of
frequency and reduced consistency of feces. So the volume of the feces increases (feces have a total weight
of > 300gr).
Diarrhea must be distinguished from:
- Pseudo-diarrhea: increased frequency without increasing stool weight/volume.
- Fecal incontinence. There is an involuntary loss of gas (so evacuation stimulus, without the real
evacuation) and/or feces.
- Tenesmus (less important than pseudo-diarrhea and fecal incontinence): there is only the stimulus
for evacuation (as with fecal incontinence), but without passing stool.
U
LCERATIVE COLITIS
Colitis is the inflammation of the colon.
The different classifications of ulcerative colitis are associated with the localization of inflammation and the
symptoms (the other classification is also associated with objective values).
- Proctitis: involving only the rectum (15% cases)
- Proctosigmoiditis: affecting rectum-sigmoid colon (35% cases)
- Left sided (distal) colitis affects the left side of the colon. It begins at the rectum and extends up to
from the rectum to the splenic flexure (40% cases)
- Pancolitis or Universal colitis: it refers to inflammation of the entire colon (15% cases).
Associated with the localization we have
the Montreal classification (Fig.3)-
classification of extent and severity.
The E is referred to as the localization
(proctitis, left-sided, pancolitis) and the S is
associated with the symptoms (which are
4).
Fig.3
There are four S, which are:
- S0 (remission): no symptoms
- S1 (mild): depending on the number of stools per day ( markers are still normal )
- S2 (moderate)
- S3 (severe). It is also associated with bloody feces. Here we also have fever (increased temperature
>37.5°), a decrease in erythrocyte concentration due to bleeding and therefore a decrease in
hemoglobin (<105g/L) and an increase in erythrocyte sedimentation rates (ESR, >30mm/h).
Hemoglobin concentration is indicated as g/L, while normally its value is for 100mL (g/100mL). The normal
value is 14g/100mL, while in S3 there is a very low level of hematocrit/hemoglobin (less than 10g/100mL).
ESR is a type of analysis, which in Italian is VES (velocità di eritrosedimentazione). It is the rate by which the
erythrocytes go down (in a column with blood), due to the presence of inflammation (immunoglobulins push
RBCs down) and also due to the different density of these red cells. In fact, RBCs are in general agglomerated
and so they weigh more. In a column with blood the RBCs go down very quickly if there is inflammation. The
normal value is about 10, while if it is higher there is a big inflammation. This is a simple and common analysis
and it is often associated with the C reactive protein CRP (PCR in Italian).
The other type of classification is the Mayo clinic score, associated with the UCDAI (Ulcerative Colitis Activity
Index (how active is inflammation). Both Mayo Clinic Score and Ulcerative Colitis Disease Activity Index are a
composite assessment of clinical symptoms (stool frequency and rectal bleeding) and endoscopic severity.
UCDAI gives the doctors the degree of inflammation, if the patients are in the relapsing or remitting moment.
Umberto Geninatti, Fiamma Cusumano
22
23.03.2023 BIASI L.3
The Mayo clinic score Ulcerative Colitis (Fig.4) is divided in 3 main degrees depending on:
Fig.4
- stool frequency
- rectal bleeding
- mucosa inflammation: for
instance if mucosa is fragile or
completely damaged (the
permeability of the mucosa is
altered)
- physician's global assessment,
associated also to the
symptoms.
The Truelove and Witts Severity Index (Fig.5) includes
clinically objective variables (analysis), such as:
- bloody stools/day
- pulse
- temperature
- hemoglobin
- ESR= erythrocyte sedimentation rate
- CRP= C reactive protein
Fig.5
C ’ (CDAI )
ROHN S DISEASE ACTIVITY INDEX
Regarding Crohn's disease, there is only one classification. In this case, it is associated with both symptoms
and clinical presence of the disease.
Clinical and laboratory variables are dependent also in this case, as with ulcerative colitis, on:
- the number of diarrhoeas
- The type of stool and its consistency
- abdominal pain (which is one of the subjective symptoms)
- general well being
Hematocrit. Bleeding (specifically, the presence of blood in the feces) induces a decrease in the hematocrit
number, which means there is a decrease in the number of red blood cells and thus in hemoglobin.
Therefore, in blood analysis we will have association hematocrit, which is useful to understand if the
changes in volume of the erythrocytes are associated with some changes in the quantity of hemoglobin.
Thus hematocrit considers both RBCs volume and hemoglobin quantity.
If hematocrit is very low, e.g. lower than 1 (Fig. 6), it will be associated with hemorrhage, which in this case
consists of the presence of blood in the feces (in which we can also detect erythrocytes).
On the other hand, depending on the moment in which this classification is considered, we need to
understand if among the different symptoms, other extra-intestinal diseases are present. In general the
main damage is associated with skeletal muscle – arthralgias (e.g. there is some pain above the muscle) and
others that are stronger, like ulcers and gangrene.
Depending on the moment and how these variables change, we can assign for each of them a number
(weighting factor, Fig.6). The activity index is the sum of all the weighting factors.
- If the activity index is less than 150, the patient’s disease is in remission.
- if it is greater than 450, there is a relapse (severe).
Umberto Geninatti, Fiamma Cusumano
23
23.03.2023 BIASI L.3
Fig.6
CDAI
IN RESPONSE TO THERAPY
Due to change in CDAI number we can assess how the patient responds to the therapy. If after the therapy
the patient's CDAI decreases by 70 points, the patient is responding to the therapy and thus it is working.
e.g. starting from 450 points (at the beginning of therapy) and decreasing by more than 70 points in 2/3
months, means that the patient is responding well to therapy.
E IBD
XTRAINTESTINAL MANIFESTATIONS OF
(Fig.7) shows the main extraintestinal manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease. There is a very high
number of these manifestations and most of them are associated with alteration of the immune and
inflammatory response, so with the alteration of
different molecules, which are associated in the
maintenance of tolerance in the gut (since they are
important to recognize presence of pathogens).
Among all of these inflammatory molecules, the
key molecule is interleukin 23 (IL23). Another
important molecule is the NOD2 receptor. The
alteration of the gene NOD2/CARD15 (coding for
NOD-like receptors) is well known because it is
mutated in various populations. Those with the
mutation have a very high risk of developing
Fig.7
Crohn's disease.
E IBD
TIOLOGY OF
IBD in general is considered to be a multifactorial disease (Fig.7).
- genetic susceptibility - different variants are studied to understand if they can induce amplification
of the immune/inflammatory response
- environmental factors - involved in the predisposition to IBD. Among them the nutritional
environment (diet) is very important to induce the development of this disease
- Besides genetic susceptibility and nutritional
environment, the permeability of the gut is also
important. Damage to the surface of enterocytes will
result in the alteration of the barrier, in particular in the
alteration of the tight junctions which are involved in the
maintenance of the normal layer of the gut and of the
integrity among different cells. Two events, alteration of
the permeability and changes of microbiota (e.g. high
quantity of different types of bacteria) can induce damage
on the response. These patients need to have individual
nutrition, organized for each one, depending on the state
of the activity of the disease. A particular nutritional Fig.8
Umberto Geninatti, Fiamma Cusumano
24
23.03.2023 BIASI L.3
approach is needed to maintain energy, because, especially in Crohn’s disease, the subjects have
difficulty in absorption and therefore it is very important to maintain the well being of the patient.
G
ENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY
The most important variants associated with IBD are linked to:
- TLRs and NLRs
- Inflammasomes
- Molecules associated with autophagy
- Alteration of lymphocytes function, of interleukin concentration (in particular IL23) and of their
receptors.
NOD- NLR
LIKE RECEPTORS S
NLRs are inside enterocytes and are involved in
the induction of the inflammatory response and in
the activation of autophagy. They are able to
induce endocytosis (e.g. of bacteria) and to
present the antigen toward the deepest layers,
where lymphocytes are present. NOD-like
receptors are associated with the activation of the
inflammasome, which is a complex of proteins Fig.9
activated during inflammation. The
inflammasome is activated either towards the induction or the decrease/ regulation of inflammation.
T - TLR
OLL LIKE RECEPTORS S
These changes are caused not only by the Nod-like receptor but also the Toll- like receptors which are present
on the surface of the enterocyte. There are different types of receptors (TLR2, 3, 4, 9), depending on the type
of bacteria that can be linked to them, acting as a ligand.
Nowadays, TLRs activation is associated with:
- The presence of different types of bacteria
- The presence of molecules similar to those of bacteria, which are able to activate these receptors.
For example, Gram negative bacteria have lipopolysaccharides which are TLRs’ ligands (in particular
TLR4) and induce signaling pathways of inflammation. Since part of lipopolysaccharides are lipid
molecules, some lipid sequences of the dietary compounds can be similar to them, thereby being
able to activate toll-like receptors as well. Summing up, we can have different responses not only
towards bacteria, but also to other ligands coming from the
Fig.10
diet.
There are possible mutations of different molecules that are
involved in this inflammatory signaling. There is a higher risk
to develop IBD, ulcerative colitis and in particular Crohn’s
disease in monozygotic twins, explaining how IBDs can be
genetic diseases (Fig.10).
These are all the types of gene mutations which can be
involved and that are studied to understand if they are
present in Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis.
Some of these genes are:
- Associated with the response of the epithelial barrier
- involved in microbial recognition - including variations of toll-like receptor and nod-like receptors,
and also variants associated to the inflammasome (NLRP3)
- associated with autophagy ( ATG16L1)
- associated with the immune activation of lymphocytes, in particular T helper 1, and their capacity to
produce some interleukins instead of others, in particular IL-23, and also their receptors. IL23R is
the receptor on the surface of the lymphocytes.
Umberto Geninatti, Fiamma Cusumano
25
23.03.2023 BIASI L.3
The main associated mutation is NOD2/CARD15 (nucleotide oligomerization domain/caspase recruitment
domain) which induces a defective ability to understand if bacteria and molecules are tolerogenic or
pathogenic, increasing the inflammasome activity.
T ( .11)
HERAPEUTIC APPROACHES FIG
- First approach with anti-inflammatory
molecules
With not so strong symptoms, the first
approach are aminosalicylates molecules,
which are not aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid).
Aspirin is dangerous for treatment of
gastrointestinal disease inflammation.
Aminosalicylates are like aspirin but the
molecule is linked to an amino group,
which is important because it blocks the
acetic/acidic group of the molecule. The
most common aminosalicylate is
Mesalazine ( not dangerous for the gut )
- Corticosteroids Fig.11
If the anti-inflammatory molecules do not
work very well, and there is an increase in the index of the damage, another therapy is proposed:
corticosteroids.
If patients do not respond to corticosteroids, the following types of therapy which can be used are:
● Immune modifiers. The most common are thiopurines: 6- mercaptopurine, azathioprine. They
induce changes in lymphocyte proliferation and in their response.
● Biological therapy:
▪ Anti-TNF-alpha agents. It consists of immunoglobulins (antibodies) against one of the
main cytokines which are in high quantities and that are associated with the increased
activation of inflammasomes (TNF-alpha).
▪ Antibiotics are used in association with other drugs but not as a main therapy (and also
in prognosis) and in presence of different types of infection.
There are some examples (Fig.12), which are
used depending on how the patient can
respond (well or not) to treatment.
In the clinical management of IBDs patients
are divided into responders (because they
respond to the treatment) and non-
responders.
Therefore, the sequential therapy in IBD
(Fig.11) is first of all anti-inflammatory
agents, like aminosalicylates. This treatment
is for the first acute phase of the colitis, trying
Fig.12
to maintain remission. But if this treatment doesn’t work and during the acute phase the patient
does not respond, the second step is to give anti-inflammatory corticosteroids orally or
intravenously, depending on the gravity of the patient's disease.
Then if the patient is a non responder, immune modifiers are used.
Finally the last/second line therapy is the biological therapy of anti-TNFα agents.
Umberto Geninatti, Fiamma Cusumano
26
