21.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.03
HEMOSTASIS
Hemostasis is a physiological process that occurs when we have a lesion at the level of the vessel walls.
It is a process activated at the site of vascular injury in order to form blood clots to prevent or limit the extent
of bleeding hemorrhage. You know that the blood is liquid and the blood cells run in the middle of the vessel
(erythrocytes in the middle and leukocytes more laterally, but they never touch or adhere to a normal
endothelium). When there is a lesion in the vessel wall the blood assumes a semisolid or gelatinous
consistency forming the so-called blood clot which is fundamental to stop the bleeding. It is a complex
process and it involves injured blood vessels and different types of blood cells: platelets, ECs, SMCs, plasma
and tissue proteins.
The normal hemostasis mechanism involved different type of elements at the site of the vascular injury. We
have platelets, extracellular and smooth muscle cells and different proteins.
The 3 groups of tissue proteins involved are:
1. Procoagulant factors that promote blood clot formation at the site of the vessel injury and stop the
leakage of blood.
2. Anticoagulant factors that act to stop or limit blood clot formation in the absence of a lesion on the
vessel wall and control the formation of the clot. They prevent thrombosis.
3. Fibrinolytic factors are involved in dissolution and disgregation of the blood clot when the lesion has
been repaired. Firstly, we need to repair the endothelium and when the lost endothelial cytes are
replaced by new ones and the wall is repaired, the blood clot can be dissolved and this is due to the
function of these factors.
V I
ASCULAR NJURY
When a vascular injury, also called lesion, occurs there is immediately a vagal response that consists in
vasoconstriction mediated by both a neurogenic reflex mechanism, and local release of factors such as
endothelin secreted by endothelial cytes (powerful vasoconstrictor). The aim of vasoconstriction is to
reduce the lesion and the quantity of blood that flows out of the vessel. bleeding will resume if not for
platelet activation and coagulation factor, so this step is fundamental.
Q: In which type of artery or veins does it happen?
A: It happens everywhere in our body. Of course the hemorrhage will be severe if it involves important vessels.
If I have a lesion at the level of the capillaries I will not have a big hemorrhage but a minor bleeding that
stops immediately.
Figure 1
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
33
21.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.03
P
LATELETS AGGREGATION AND ADHESION
After the initial transient vasoconstriction we have the activation of platelets that start to adhere to
endothelium and to each other. Platelets are disc-shaped anucleate cell fragments (deriving from
megakaryocytes). In normal condition they never adhere to intact endothelium or aggregate to each other,
they only start to adhere at the site of the lesion to close the hole.
The function of these activated platelets depends on several specific glycoprotein receptors, and also on their
capacity of contraction of the cytoskeleton. They are fundamental in this process since they release several
factors present in two specific types of cytoplasmic granules:
- α-granules: contain the proteins of coagulation cascade: fibrinogen, factor V, von Willebrand factor
(vWF), fibronectin, PDGF, TGFb, adhesion molecules.
- The second type of granules are the dense, or δ-granules: we can find adenosine diphosphate (ADP),
adenosine triphosphate (ATP), calcium, serotonin, histamine and many other factors. During the
activation of the platelets all the granule content will be released because each factor has an
important rule in all the process.
P H
RIMARY AEMOSTASIS
When there is a lesion of the vascular wall I lose endothelocytes and I have immediate exposition of highly
thrombogenic constituents of the subendothelial connective tissue. So the subendothelial collagen is directly
exposed to the blood and because of its thrombogenic properties, the platelets start to adhere at the site of
the lesion and aggregate to each other to form the first platelet plug. This step is indicated as primary
hemostasis (or primary platelet plug) that occludes the injured vessel and prevents blood to flow out.
T
HE MECHANISM OF PLATELET AGGREGATION
The adhesion of platelets is favored by the presence of the vWF which acts as an adhesion bridge between
the exposed collagen and glycoprotein platelet receptors. It is basically the bridge between collagen and
platelet. The aggregation of other platelets to each other is possible thanks to fibrinogen, which acts as a
bridge between two receptor complexes on different platelets, composed of GpIIb-IIIa. When ATP that is
present in dense granules is released, it can change the conformation of the receptor complex increasing the
activity for fibrinogen. The deficiency of one receptor is responsible for disorders such as deficiency of von
Willebrand disease. The patient suffering from these disorders will have troubles in the hemostasis process
and in forming an appropriate blood clot.
Figure 2
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
34
21.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.03
When the platelets start to be activated they change their shape, from a smooth disc to a spiky “sea urchins”,
that increase the surface area and contemporary there is also the release of granule contents. All these
factors accumulated in the two types of granules will be released.
Platelet activation is induced by the same factors that are released, including ADP and will stimulate platelet
recruitment. Platelets will arrive at the site of the lesion, will be activated thanks to the factors present in
the granules and will start to adhere and aggregate. In this step we have the release of thromboxane A2
(TxA2) that will further stimulate aggregation of the platelet itself. This step can be defined as additional
platelet aggregation.
At the beginning the initial wave of aggregation is reversible (with the activation of thrombin, the platelet
plug will be irreversible), but later when there is the production of insoluble fibrin (necessary for stabilization
of blood clot), this aggregation of platelets becomes irreversible. So at this point the primary clot will become
irreversible.
Figure 3
This picture (fig3) summarizes the primary hemostasis which results in the formation of the platelet plug.
We have activation, recruitment and release of granules content. These factors stimulate adhesion and
aggregation of platelets (vWF acts as a bridge between the principal receptor of platelet to sub endothelial
collagen). So they bind the extra cell matrix exposed after the lesion, they change their shape. This is the
formation of the first platelet plug.
Q: I didn't get the action of fibrin, could you please explain it again?
The professor explains again fibrinogen action:
The fibrinogen that is present in the granules of the platelets is also one of the plasmatic proteins. It
contributes to favoring the aggregation among other platelets, it can bind to a receptor complex present on
the surface of the platelets (made by GpIIB and IIIA) and on the other side binds to another complex receptor
present on a second platelet. It connects the two platelets promoting aggregation. So these receptors are
ALWAYS present on the surface of platelets but can be modified by the release of these factors, to increase
affinity and bind to fibrinogen, resulting in aggregation.
C C
OAGULATION ASCADE
Immediately after the formation of the primary plug, only made of aggregated platelets, there is a
coagulation cascade which consist in a series of amplifying enzymatic reactions which results in deposition
of an insoluble fibrin clot, important to stabilize the plug.
Only with the presence of fibrin the plaque is strong and at this point this plug is irreversible. It consist in a
series of factor activation in which the first factor will activate the second one and so on. During platelet
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
35
21.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.03
activation it is important to activate the coagulation cascade because there is the translocation of negatively
charged phospholipids on their surface. The presence of these phospholipids is important because
phospholipids can act as a receptor for factor X, important for coagulation cascade, and will promote the
assembly of coagulation factor complexes.
We have 2 types of coagulation cascades: intrinsic and extrinsic pathways; the 2 pathways converge in the
activation of factor X Calcium-dependent reactions.
The intrinsic pathway is activated by factors that are only present in the blood. The first factor is Hageman’s
factor, it is a starter of many cascades in inflammatory response. All these factors are present in the blood as
precursors, so inactive. The activation of Hageman’s factor is possible thanks to activated platelets (because
they are activated before the coagulation cascade) and plasma proteins. After activation of factor XII we have
the activation of factor XI and so on, as you can see. The involvement of activated platelets contribute in
the middle of cascade to favor bind of factor 5 and 10, even if this does not happen before the activation of
the pathways. activation factor are only present in the blood. A clotting is initiated in laboratory by adding
phospholipids calcium and wither a negative charged substances of a source of tissue factor. the red
polypeptides ( in picture 4) are inactive factors, the dark green are active polypeptides while the light green
one correspond to cofactors.
The extrinsic coagulation cascade is activated by vascular damage and is induced by the release of a tissue
factor, tissue thromboplastin (TF), which is not present in the blood and activated by vascular damage but is
released by damaged tissue. Tissue thromboplastin is the starter of extrinsic coagulation cascade. in the end
we have activation of prothrombin which lead to activation of thrombin, which is a fundamental protein
which main activity is to activate transformation of fibrinogen ( soluble) to fibrin (insoluble).
Figure 4
These two pathways converge in a bond that consists in the activation of factor X. In Both cases the result is
the formation of fibrin, important for platelet plug. The insoluble fibrin is the result of fibrinogen conversion
that in turn is catalyzed by thrombin. The thrombin arises from the precursor prothrombin and is important
for the conversion of fibrinogen into insoluble fibrin, important for the stabilization of primary platelet plug.
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
36
21.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.03
T
HROMBIN
The thrombin is a fundamental enzyme in all the coagulation cascade because it has many functions which
all lead to one main purpose: amplify the formation of blood clot. the functions are
● Stimulate the activation of platelets by stimulating
● release of granules content
● recruitment of other platelets
● platelet contraction (contraction of cytoskeletal proteins, important for consolidation of
their aggregation)
● Converts soluble fibrinogen into fibrin monomers that polymerize into an insoluble clot cementing
the platelets. At this point we have the formation of a secondary definitive platelet plug or clot. It
can happen that some red cells and leukocytes can be entrapped inside the clot (made of platelets
and fibrin).
● Stimulate the coagulation process by activating factor XI, but also V and VIII
● Stabilize the secondary platelet plug by activating factor XIII, which forms more solid covalent cross-
links between fibers of fibrin.
● Stimulate clot contraction, important because during clot contraction, the serum is removed.
● Pro-inflammatory effects: activates protease-activated receptors (PARs) expressed on inflammatory
cells, endothelium, and other cells contributing to tissue repair and angiogenesis. After the
stimulation of these receptors the inflammatory cells can release all the factors that are involved in
the repair and angiogenesis process.
● Anticoagulant effects: it stimulates endothelial cytes to release factors such as NO and PGI2, with
which the blood clot is composed. It is important to prevent the formation of the clot outside the
site of injury. It can act as an anticoagulant preventing the clot from extending beyond the site of the
vascular injury.
Figure 5
Q: Those factors bind platelets or remain free in the blood? Because it can stimulate coagulation in other
sites being free in the blood.
A: no they don't because activated platelets are present only at the site of the injury. It is a local, not diffused
event, otherwise it would be a pathological process, not a physiological one.
The most important function of thrombin is that it favors the release of granules content of platelets, and
converts fibrinogen into insoluble fibrin, important for the stabilization of a clot.
Thrombin can also stimulate
- inflammatory cells to release other important factors that are involved in the angiogenesis, these
factors can stimulate the smooth muscle cells.
- release by ECs of factors that can control the formation of the blood clot, preventing the formation
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
37
21.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.03
of the clot outside the site of the lesion, such as NO and PGI2.
Figure 6
- secretion of the tissue plasminogen activator is important for the formation of plasmin, one of the
most important for the dissolution of the clot. This factor is released to limit the clot only at the site
of the lesion.
From this picture we can summarize all the functions of thrombin, (the most important enzyme in the
coagulation cascade, but also the hemostatic process). fig.6
S H
ECONDARY EMOSTASIS
Figure 7
Now we have a CPI at the level of the secondary hemostasis with the secondary platelet plug, that is the
definitive clot.
So we have the coagulation cascade, intrinsic or extrinsic, with the final formation of the insoluble fibrin,
important to stabilize the previous platelet plug, to obtain the secondary clot. This process can also be called
cementing the clot. The clot is stable, we stop the blood from flowing out, then in 24 hours we should have
the repair of the endothelium and the dissolution of the blood clot. To dissolve the clot we have the activation
of the fibrinolysis through the enzymatic activity of plasmin. It has 2 functions:
- It limits clot size
- It contributes to dissolution of the blood clot
The enzyme important for the dissolution of the blood clot is plasmin, we obtain it from the enzymatic
hydrolysis of plasminogen, present in the action of various factors that are able to activate plasminogen and
convert it into plasmin. plasmin breaks down fibrin, fibrinogen and some coagulation factors . The
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
38
21.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.03
plasminogen can be activated by factors present in the blood, such as Hageman factor or factorXIIa, and
kallikrein deriving from the immediate vicinity of the clot.
Other tissue factors that can activate it are released by microorganisms for example urokinase, streptokinase
and staphylokinase.
The most important plasminogen activator is tissue plasminogen activator, indicated with t-PA, as seen in
the scheme it will lead to the activation of plasminogen.
Figure 8
After plasminogen activation we have the formation of the plasmin which is able to digest fibrin and other
factors that can be in touch with the clot such as fibrinogen and some coagulation factors, obtaining the
dissolution of the clot.
The action of plasmin must be controlled, in this case we have other factors that must regulate its action.
There are some anticoagulant factors to prevent the formation of the clot outside the site of the injury. This
process is the result of the balance of pro coagulation factors and anticoagulation factors and fibrinolytic
factors. The clot must be formed only at the level of the injury so contemporary to its formation we have
the release of a factor to limit the extension of the clot. In this case we have the release of plasmin that has
to digest the blood clot and other factors are released to inhibit the excess action of plasmin. Factors that
inhibit plasmin are alpha -plasmin inhibitors that limit its action only where and when it is necessary.
2
The last phase of the hemostasis is characterized by clot contraction to eliminate the liquid part, the serum.
Then we have the activation of plasminogen through the release of intrinsic and extrinsic activation factors,
mainly t-PA. There is also the release of some factors that prevent excessive coagulation such as a
fibrinolytic product, and thrombomodulin. It is a real balance between all the factors of the three groups
(coagulation, anticoagulation and fibrinolytic factors).
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
39
21.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.03
Figure 9
We have ECs that can release t-PA and urokinase to activate plasminogen, that increases the conversion of
plasminogen into plasmin, that starts to digest fibrin and other coagulation factors that are in the blood. To
avoid the excessive action of these activator factors of plasminogen, inhibitors such as PKI are released. On
the other side we have free plasmin that must be controlled: if necessary plasmin can digest the blood clot
but if it is overproduced, immediately it is blocked by specific inhibitors such as alpha plasmin that bind it to
2-
stop the functioning.
E
NDOTHELIUM
The endothelium has a fundamental role in the hemostatic process, it regulates the formation, propagation
and dissolution of the clot. It can control all the phases of the hemostatic process because it is important to
regulate the balance between anticoagulant and procoagulant activities. Normal endothelium is a barrier,
and it releases factors to inhibit platelet adhesion and aggregation, for example NO and PGI2, ADP, when it
is intact. Normal ECs express several factors that can also inhibit coagulation, for example thrombomodulin
(inhibitor or regulator of coagulation cascade), endothelial protein C receptor, heparin-like molecules, they
can also stimulate the release of tissue plasminogen activator.
ECs can also regulate coagulation cascade by binding and altering activity of thrombin, a potent platelet
activator. The normal endothelium has to fight against the formation of the clot. All anticoagulation and
fibrinolytic factors act to prevent thrombosis and to prevent the formation of abnormal clots, when there
isn’t any damage in the vascular clot.
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
40
21.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.03
Figure 10
When there is a lesion at the level of the endothelium, it loses all its antithrombogenic properties and at that
point the platelets are able to form clots.
From this picture (fig10) also we can see the function of the endothelium summarized. There are many
factors which are antithrombogenic such as heparin-like molecules that stop and limit thrombin and the
possibility to form clots when it is not necessary (because there is no lesion), or to release other coagulation
factors as Prostaglandin 2, released to inhibit platelet aggregation. So the endothelium has an
important function in the hemostatic process.
D , H
ERANGED HEMOSTASIS EMORRHAGIC AND THROMBOTIC DISORDERS
There are situations characterized by the alteration of the hemostatic process. The result is the appearance
of hemorrhagic or thrombotic disorders.
hemorrhagic disorders: alteration concerning the coagulation cascade and the coagulation factors
thrombogenic events: increased action of the coagulation factors and anticoagulation factors.
In case of hemorrhagic disorders characterized by excessive bleeding, we have some alteration in one of the
steps of the hemostatic process. For example we have problems forming primary or secondary hemostatic
plug, we are not able to stop blood flowing out, some of the clinical signs that can indicate an hemostatic
disorder is the formation in the skin of petechiae, purpura, ecchymoses so skin hemorrhage.
In case of thrombotic disorders we have the formation of blood clots without an injury at the level of the
vascular wall so these clots can form everywhere. Thrombosis is an abnormal hemostatic process because
the formation of the clot occurs without a lesion.
C
AUSES OF HEMORRHAGIC DISORDERS
Some hemorrhagic disorders are dependent on vessel factors.
They can be genetic or acquired diseases.
There could be
● Lack or insufficient constriction of the vasal lumen.
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
41
21.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.03
The first step is vasoconstriction and if this step is missing due to degenerative diseases at the level of the
vessel wall (so in case of angiomatosis or hemastosis) there can be malformation of vessels or permanent
dilation, resulting in the incapacity of SMCs to control vasoconstriction.
● Altered functions of ECs.
There are diseases characterized by deficiency of von Willebrand factors (important for adhesion of platelets,
acting as a bridge between receptor and sub endothelial collagen
● Vessel wall component alterations (collagen, elastin, etc.)
● Alterations in SMCs and fibroblasts.
Other hemorrhagic disorders are due to platelet disorders.
They can be genetic or acquired diseases.
Caused by
● Defects in platelet formation
● Reduced number of platelets is reduced due to a reduced number of precursors (megakaryocytes) 🡪
maturation defects or increased destruction.
● Increased number of platelets, in presence of plateletosis, characterized by myeloproliferative
syndromes such as chronic myelogenous leukemia, myeloid metaplasia, etc.
Other Hemorrhagic disorders dependent on coagulation disorders.
Can be either genetic or acquired diseases.
● Hemophilia (genetic disorder)
● Hemophilia A is caused by a deficiency in factor VIII, but also the mutation of a few
coagulation factors
● hemophilia B is due to a deficiency of factor IX
● Deficiency of coagulation factor production in case of hepatic diseases. In the liver there is the
synthesis of many coagulation factors, in case of hepatic diseases (cirrhosis or hepatitis) there is a
deficiency in the synthesis of coagulation factors and a lack in the coagulation cascade
● Excessive destruction in case of disseminated intravascular proteolysis, or failed binding to
receptors.
We can have alterations in the coagulation control.
For example
● Diseases of the fibrinolytic system 🡪 components of the fibrinolytic system are plasminogen,
plasminogen activators or inhibitors, inhibitors of plasminogen activators, specific plasmin inhibitors
(𝛼2-antiplasnin, 𝛼2- macroglobulin).
● Genetic or acquired deficiency of plasmin inhibitors. In this case there is an excessive action
of plasmin, excessive fibrinolysis with consequent hemorrhagic events, because fibrinolytic
system is amplified as plasmin is not regulated by inhibitors of plasmin. As a consequence it
works in an excessive way and the results are hemorrhagic manifestations.
● Antiprotease deficiency
Regarding the main antiproteases that control coagulation factors that are antitrypsin, antichymotrypsin,
antithrombin III, protein C and S, C1 inactivator, protein C inhibitors. All these factors regulate the formation
of clots, especially antithrombin.
● Genetic acquired deficiency of antithrombin III, the result is the presence of thrombotic
events.
Eleonora Deinite, Chiara Rosa
42
