24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
NUTRITIONAL DISEASES
Last year, the topics of this lecture were explained by another professor. The parts colored in gray
are those explained by him previously and not by Gamba during this year’s lecture, but were kept in
the sbobina because they may add useful information.
The main subjects we try to address are nutritional diseases and disorders, adverse reactions to
food, allergies and intolerances, celiac disease.
M
ALNUTRITION
An appropriate diet should provide sufficient energy in the form of carbohydrates, fats and proteins,
vitamins and minerals.
The proper diet should contain at least 50-55% of the food intake in carbohydrates. So carbohydrates
should be the main source in a proper balanced diet. For people doing sports it is the same.
Carbohydrates represent the most important fuel in our body, in fact if you think about the ATP
production by a single molecule of glucose you easily recognize the importance.
It is not necessary to eat too many proteins because you just overload the kidney function (10-20%).
As far as lipids are concerned, not many are needed, maximum 20-30%.
We have two main carbohydrates classes: simple sugars and complex sugars. We need to eat
complex sugars and not too many simple sugars because they are almost immediately absorbed, on
the contrary complex sugars have a delayed effect because it takes two/three hours to absorb them.
So when we say that a balanced diet should contain at least 50-55% of the food intake in
carbohydrates, we are mainly talking about complex sugars even if it depends on physical activity,
basal metabolism and energy demand.
An equilibrated diet should also include a wise way of food intake meaning it is better to split the
daily calorie intake into 3 or 5 different small meals instead of eating the majority of food for instance
in the evening. If you eat all the majority of your calories in the evening you go to bed and do not
consume the calories. It is better to eat dividing meals at different moments.
It is important to differentiate between primary malnutrition and secondary malnutrition.
Primary malnutrition is when all the components are missing from the diet, while secondary
malnutrition is a type of malnutrition due to other pathologies, related to malabsorption for
example. At the end the result is the same, this components are missing from the body, but the
difference depends on the etiology of the malnutrition.
The conditions that may lead to malnutrition are a lot:
- poverty;
- self-imposed dietary restrictions (conditions like anorexia or bulimia);
- ignorance and failure of diet supplementation. Ignorance because for example we should know
that folic acid is essential in pregnant women, but because of ignorance it may not be
supplemented;
- advanced cancers in which cachexia occurs;
- chronic alcoholism;
- gastrointestinal pathologies and malabsorption syndromes, genetic diseases (may cause
malabsorption and secondary malnutrition);
- specific pharmacological therapies and total parenteral nutrition;
- infections.
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
50
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
M
AJOR DISEASES AND CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH INADEQUATE DIGESTION AND FOOD MALABSORPTION
1) Gastric resection, accelerated gastric emptying (short bowel syndrome = sindrome dell’intestino
corto)
2) Pancreatic insufficiency (for example we have seen cystic fibrosis, a recessive disorder whose
name comes from this fibrotic tissue at the level of the pancreas. In the case of cystic fibrosis we
have a pancreatic insufficiency and the lack of production of pancreatic enzymes leads to a
malabsorption due to genetic disorders.)
3) Pathologies of the liver and biliary tract with cholestasis
4) Congenital or acquired lactase deficiency
5) Intestinal villous atrophy (celiac disease)
6) Chronic inflammation of the intestinal mucosa
The last two of course lead to malabsorption and secondary malnutrition.
It is important to not intake an insufficient amount of carbohydrates because we need glucose for
energy, if it is not sufficient we use lipids and then proteins - amino acids and fatty acids to produce
energy and this is not good.
On the contrary, an excessive carbohydrate uptake especially in the case of simple sugars is not good
because then they become a good substrate for new lipid synthesis, so you increase the rate of lipid
synthesis especially in the liver causing the production of TGs (triglycerides) and so liver steatosis.
Moreover, too many lipids in the gut make the digestion difficult, causing diarrhea, meteorism
because the microbiota takes advantage of this excess of lipids.
If we do not have enough amino acids and protein intake our protein synthesis will be impaired and
lead to blood clotting deficit (due to deficit in protein synthesis), impairment of immunological
defenses.
On the other hand, if we eat too many proteins we give extra work to our kidneys. It depends on age,
in aging people the problems are amplified.
If we do not have a sufficient uptake of lipids we have an impaired absorption of fat soluble vitamins
(A, E, K, D) and also we need long chain fatty acids, whereas short chain FAs could be provided by a
physiological healthy microbiota.
An excessive uptake of lipids will lead to troubles in digestion. Long digestion problems like diarrhea
are present.
SAM
SAM stands for Severe Acute Malnutrition. It is a new way to indicate PEM, that stands for Protein
Energy Malnutrition (in Italian malnutrizione protidoenergetica), and was used until some years ago.
Now in new textbooks, it is called SAM and it is common in low income countries and around 25%
of children are affected by it. Malnutrition is determined based on the BMI (body mass index). BMI
is the calculated as the ratio between weight (expressed in kg) and squared height (expressed as
2
squared meters). If this value is less than 16 kg/m , the person is considered to be affected by
malnutrition. Two people can appear different and still have the same BMI because it also depends
on the distribution of fats and skeletal muscles.
Other useful parameters are:
-
fat reserves (thickness of skin folds),
- muscle mass (reduced circumference of the central part of the arm),
- serum protein (the measurement of albumin and transferrin). Proteins like albumin are measured
in order to understand whether you are in front of a person will malnutrition, because a typical sign
of malnutrition is hypoalbulinemia (low levels of albumin in the blood),
- gut microbioma (it changes in people with malnutrition)
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
51
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
There are two differently regulated protein compartments in the body:
1) somatic compartment (proteins in skeletal muscles)
2) visceral compartment (protein stores in the visceral organs, primarily the liver). It is composed
by the proteins that are more vital for our organs.
M
ARASMUS
In Italian it is called Marasma. It is characteristic mainly of children that are lacking calories, they
have a deficit in total calories, not only proteins. These are children that do not eat enough fats or
proteins. A child is considered to have marasmus when weight falls to 60% of normal for sex, height,
and age and has low BMI (lower than 16). They are characterized by growth retardation and loss of
muscle because in case of deficit in total calories we have catabolism and depletion of the somatic
protein compartment. The visceral protein compartment, which is presumably more precious and
critical for survival, is only marginally depleted, and hence serum albumin levels (and other proteins
in the blood) are either normal or only slightly reduced. Subcutaneous fat is also mobilized and used
as source of energy. Anemia may be also present and signs of multiple vitamin deficiencies are
present. For example we have seen that vitamin B12 is essential for DNA synthesis and a
megaloblastic anemia can be present. Vitamin C is important for the absorption of iron, so in case
of a deficiency also iron is depleted and there is a sideroblastic anemia. and there is evidence of
immune deficiency (concurrent infections).
Question: why we see megaloblastic anemia in this?
Answer: because vitamin B12 is present in all the foods of animal origin and
the precursors of red blood cells in the bone marrow are not able to divide
and proliferate and it causes megaloblastic anemia, so megaloblasts die
inside the bone marrow and so few red blood cells are released in the blood
and the few that reach the blood are bigger. This is because the
proerythblasts try to divide, so the cytoplasm becomes bigger but the DNA is
not able to duplicate and divide, so this gives rise to a bigger cell. This
depends also on the susceptibility of the child, because he may have a
megaloblastic anemia because of the lack of B12 but microcytic anemia
because of the lack of iron.
Fig. 1
K
WASHIORKOR
The most common form of SAM in African children who have been weaned
too early and fed, almost exclusively, a carbohydrate diet. They do not eat
proteins but only carbohydrates and so a marked protein deprivation is
associated with severe depletion of the visceral protein compartment.
Proteins of the liver are catabolized and the resultant hypoalbuminemia
gives rise to generalized edema. This is because the low colloidosmotic
pressure in the blood brings fluid to exit from the blood and reach the tissues.
This kind of edema is called transudate, not to be confused with inflammatory
edema, the exudates. The loss of weight in these patients is masked by the
increased fluid retention, very severe condition. Fat deposits are maintained,
muscle atrophy is less marked than in marasmus. Less severe forms can be
seen in individuals with chronic diarrheal states.
Fig. 2
The term is originated from Ghana and it means “the disease of the first
child”. This is because when the second child is born, the mother gives milk to the second and the
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
52
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
first child loses his milk.
Both marasmus and kwashiorkor are characterized by different types of anemia. It may be
microcytic because of the lack of iron or macrocytic because of the lack of vitamin B12.
The brain may be also affected if the child suffers from this malnutrition during the first 1 or 2 years
of life or if children are born from mother that suffer from malnutrition, the brain may be less
developed have and cerebral atrophy already at birth.
S
ECONDARY MALNUTRITION
Secondary malnutrition often develops in chronically ill, elderly, and bedridden patients. More than
50% of older residents in nursing homes in the United States are malnourished. The signs of
secondary malnutrition are:
(1) Depletion of subcutaneous fat
(2) Muscle atrophy
(3) Ankle or sacral edema
(4) Increased risk of infection
(5) Impaired wound healing
(6) Anemia
C
ACHEXIA
Cachexia is a sort of secondary malnutrition that occurs in patients with advanced cancers. It is a
highly debilitating condition characterized by:
1) Extreme weight loss
2) Fatigue
3) Muscle atrophy (Mortality is generally the consequence of atrophy of the diaphragm)
4) Anemia
5) Anorexia
6) Edema
The major mechanism of cachexia is the destruction of proteins by
the proteasome. In particular we have the PIF (proteolysis-inducing
factor) that together with the TNF and other cytokines released by
the tumor or by the host cell bind to specific receptors and activates
NFkB. NFkB translocates to the nucleus and activates the
transcription of several pro-inflammatory cytokines and also some
muscle specific ubiquitin ligases. So NFkB activation favors the
ubiquitination of proteins and proteins that are ubiquitinated are
recognized by the proteasome and are degraded by it. This results in
the loss of myocytes. I won’t ask you about cachexia, this is just an
Fig. 3
example I wanted to add.
V
ITAMIN DEFICIENCIES
Vitamins may be fat soluble or water soluble. Vitamin A, vitamin K and vitamin D are all liposoluble.
Vitamins can be synthesized by our body or absorbed through the diet. Vitamin D is an example of
a vitamin synthesized by our body but it can be also assumed with the diet.
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
53
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
Vitamin deficiency can also be primary or secondary (due to other diseases that avoid the absorption
of the vitamin).
● Vitamin A
Vitamin A is a fat soluble vitamin. It is present as preformed
VitA in foods of animal origin. Also, the preformed VitA
represents 70% of all the vitamin A that we have to assume. The
other 30% is represented by the vitamin A in the form of
provitamin A present in vegetables, for example the
carotenoids and beta-carotene is the main one present in
vegetables, like in carrots. Beta carotene or vitamin A in the
form of retinol is absorbed by the intestine and charged in
lipoproteins called chylomicrons. These reach the liver and
bind to specific receptors on hepatocytes that recognize the
apolipoprotein E that surrounds chylomicros. Retinol enters
the hepatocytes and it is esterified into retinyl esters, which is
the form of retinol that can be stored in the tissues. In case of
need, the retinol binds to specific binding proteins and reach
the peripheral tissues. Also in the peripheral tissues, retinol may
be esterified in order to be stored and used only when needed.
Its main functions are:
1) Maintenance of normal vision
2) Cell growth and mainteinance of the differentiation of
Fig. 4
epithelial cells (important in the differentiation of the muco-
secreting epithelium). The compound that in particular is
responsible for the maintenance of the differentiation of epithelial cells is the retinoid acid that
comes from the oxidation of retinol in the periphery.
3) Metabolic effects (e.g. drug metabolism, fatty acids…)
4) Stimulation of the immune system
5) Photoprotection
6) Antioxidant
It is protective towards all epithelia, it has an epithelial tropism.
The causes of vitamin A deficiency are general undernutrition (or primary malnutrition) and
secondary malnutrition due to malabsorption of fats that characterizes cystic fibrosis. In cystic
fibrosis, we have the lack of pancreatic enzymes that brings to fat malabsorption, steatorrhea,
diarrhea and all the vitamins that are fat-soluble are lost.
The vitamin A deficiency brings to impaired vision, in particular in reduced light.
In particular you have problems because of the purple pigment, the production of which needs a
sufficient amount of vitamin A. If this doesn’t happen we have hemeralopia, where in the late
afternoon you don’t see properly because of the low levels of light. In particular, even in the
conjunctiva and cornea you have an increased production of connective tissue.
It causes epithelial metaplasia and keratinization. As I told you, retinol is important in maintaining
the differentiation of cells. Metaplasia is characterized by the morphological changes of well
differentiated cells in another well differentiated cells. For example the squamous metaplasia. The
term squamous refers to the cells in their final conformation. In the airways, the epithelium is
psudostratified (monolayer that appears as a multilayer because of the organization of the nuclei),
columnar and ciliated. The metaplasia is characterized by the loss of the cilia and the acquisition of
new phonotypical characteristics and the cells become squamous. The squamous metaplasia of the
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
54
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
epithelia is a characteristic of the vitamin A deficiency and this happens mainly at the level of the
epithelium of the conjunctiva and the lacrimal ducts bringing to this pathological condition called
xeroftalmia, characterized by dryness of the conjunctiva (also called dry eye). At the level of the
eye, we can find the bitot spots, corneal ulcers and also keratomalacia, which is the more severe
condition at the level of the eye and can lead to blindness and is characterized by the erosion of the
corneal surface. This is due to the dry eye and to the fact that this squamous metaplasia sometimes
is also characterized by keratinization (deposition of keratin). This characteristics can be also
present at the level of the respiratory tract, so a kind of keratinized squamous metaplasia similar to
the metaplasia that appears in the smokers. Remember that metaplasia is an adaptation to a
condition, in this case vitamin A deficiency so it is a reversible condition in case of the restoration of
normal quantities of vitamin A and tissue may be again normal, but the problem is that metaplasia
is a precancerousis so it has high probability to become a malignant tumor.
A deficiency could cause problems in all epithelia, including intestinal, neurological and
cardiovascular. We should be very careful about supplementing vitamin A because it could easily
lead to hypervitaminosis. When you give a vitamin complex, a mixture of different vitamins that
includes vitamin A, you should be careful not to prolong the vitamin supplementation over two or
three months, to avoid hypervitaminosis.
● Vitamin D
It is another fat-soluble vitamin. it is characterized by endogenous synthesis in the skin starting from
the precursor 7-dehydrocholesterol that thanks to a
photochemical reaction (UVB radiation) (~ 90%). This
reaction results in the synthesis of cholecalciferol,
known as vitamin D3 and synthesized endogenously in
the skin. It can also be assumed in the diet, only 10% is
present in food, for example dairy foods.
Cholecalciferol is not so active, it has to be
metabolized by the liver and the kidney. In the kidney
there are important enzymes that oxidize vitamin D
giving rise to 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D. 1 and 25 are
the positions in which cholecalciferol is oxidized.
Remember that this oxidized form is created thanks to
the enzymes present in kidney and liver, so if we have
problems at the level of the liver or kidney also vitamin
D may not be oxidized and so activated.
The main steps of vitamin D metabolism are:
1) Photochemical synthesis of vitamin D from 7-
dehydrocholesterol in the skin and absorption of
vitamin D from foods
Fig. 5
2) Binding of vitamin D to plasma α1- globulin (D-
binding protein or DBP, which is a transporter) and transport into the liver.
3) Conversion of vitamin D into 25-hydroxycholecalciferol [25-OH-D] in the liver, through the action
of 25- hydroxylases (enzyme present in the liver), including CYP27A1 and other CYPs.
4) Conversion of 25-OH-D into 1,25- dihydroxyvitamin D [1α,25(OH)2D3], the most active form of
vitamin D, by the enzyme 1α-hydroxylase in the kidney.
Main functions of vitamin D are to preserve the adequate plasma levels of calcium and phosphorus.
Conditions of hypocalcemia or hypophosphatemia are able to be sensed by the kidney that
activates these enzymes and brings to the formation in that moment of more active vitamin D. The
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
55
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
high levels of active vitamin D bring to a sort of negative feedback, because if we have too much or
sufficient active vitamin D the kidney stops oxidizing new 25-hydroxycholecalciferol, while if it is
needed it is oxidized.
1,25- dihydroxyvitamin D stimulates the intestinal absorption of calcium and phosphorus, made
through active transport in the small intestine and passive transport in the colon. Vitamin D
regulates especially the absorption of calcium, especially in the small intestine where the transport
is active. Vitamin D is important for bones and muscle function and reactivity, and also against
infections. Also the parathyroid glands have the important role to sense the extracellular
concentration o calcium. When there is a condition of hypocalcemia, the parathyroid glands
produce the PTH that stimulates the kidney to oxidize the inactive form of vitamin D creating the
active form and at the same time the PTH stimulates the maturation of the osteoclasts that degrade
bones bringing the release of calcium.
For instance, during Covid-19, in many groups with moderate to severe disease, vitamin D was very
low. This is probably a secondary consequence, but some people suggested supplementing Covid
patients with vitamin D, and other people suggested using vitamin D to prevent viral infections.
Vitamin D is an oxysterol, and it could contribute to good antiviral response.
Fig. 7
I prefer to start explaining this (fig.6) from point 4. When you have low serum concentration of
calcium and phosphate in the blood, the parathyroid gland produces PTH. PTH stimulates the
maturation of osteoclasts so calcium is taken from the bones and at the same time it stimulates the
kidney to oxidize the 25-hydroxycholecalciferol to the 1,25- dihydroxyvitamin D. This active
compound goes to stimulate the absorption of calcium and phosphorus to restore their
concentration in blood. The consequencies of hypocalcemia and hypophosphatemia are at the level
of the bone mineralization and it can bring to rickets (in Italian rachitismo) in children (fig.7). In
growing children it is characterized by micrifractures, skeletal malformations, malformations not
only at the level of the legs that have a particular shape similar to arches and also at the level of the
head which has flat occipital bones and deformation of the parietal ones. Also the sternum may be
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
56
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
convex. In adults the lack of vitamin D is called osteomalacia, characterized
Fig. 6
mainly by being prone to fracture. Hypocalcemic tetany is a convulsive state
due to the low calcium concentration of ionized calcium, which is required
for normal neural excitation and the relaxation of muscles. It’s easy to get a
vitamin D deficiency, especially in some areas where there’s not enough
exposure to sun. Hypervitaminosis D is very rare, even in supplemented
people, contrary to hypervitaminosis A.
Fig. 7
● Vitamin C
It is also called ascorbic acid and it is a water soluble vitamin. It derives
exclusively from the diet (liver, milk, fish, lemons, oranges, tomatoes and the
food that contains the biggest quantity vitamin C is the pepper). The main function of vitamin C are:
• activation of enzymes that lead to the formation of collagen in particular the vitamin C accelerates
the hydroxylation of pro-collagen and in this way collagen can be produced and excreted from the
fibroblasts in the right way;
• it has antioxidant properties (for examples a lot of creams for women are rich in vitamin C because
of their anti-oxidant properties)
• Facilitates intestinal absorption of iron. Iron, to be absorbed, must be in the reduced form, and
vitamin C needs to be absorbed in the oxidized form. Thanks to vitamin C iron can be absorbed and
used for the production of red blood cells. Often young ladies using iron supplementation are
provided with iron and vitamin C in the oxidized form, that reduces iron. It’s easier to absorb iron if
it’s coupled with vitamin C.
Scurvy (in Italian scorbuto) is the consequence of hypovitaminosis C, and it gives many problems.
It’s difficult to have hypovitaminosis C in our area, but there are countries in which fruits and
th th
vegetables are not of easy assumption and in 15 and 16 century it was diffused in sailors that did
not have fresh fruits. In our case vitamin C
deficiency could be only due to a specific
malnutrition, like alcoholism, which
interferes with the absorption of various
nutrients. Alcohol can give gastritis and
gastroenteritis, it could favor damage to
our gastric and intestinal mucosa. It is
characterized by poor vessels support that
results in bleeding tendency because and
collagen is missing, it is impaired. This
Fig. 8
shown at the level of the gums, the skin
because the little vessels may rupture, impaired wound healing or scar formation.
It is well absorbed in our intestine especially in oxidized form, so dehydroascorbic acid (the reduced
form is ascorbic acid). Vitamin C and vitamin E react well together. Vitamin E is in the cell
membranes, and one single molecule of vitamin E keeps under control about 2000/3000 molecules
of polyunsaturated fatty acids, because of the very tight and efficient interaction with vitamin C.
When polyunsaturated fatty acids undergo oxidation, vitamin E rapidly gives an electron so the free
radical reaction is blocked and the polyunsaturated fatty acid is not damaged and not broken down.
But now vitamin E is oxidized in the middle of the membrane, and once it’s oxidized the molecule
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
57
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
moves towards the cytoplasm and it’s at the internal border of the membrane. Here it’s able to
interact with hydrosoluble antioxidant vitamin C, which loves to be oxidized. As soon as it interacts
with vitamin E, vitamin C gets oxidized, gives the electron to vitamin E and vitamin E is ready to go
back in the middle of the membrane and work to protect polyunsaturated fatty acids. After 2-3
months of vitamin A retinol supplementation there is a risk of moderate hypervitaminosis, so
epithelia may be in trouble.
Usually vitamin E employed in supplements is ɑ-Tocopherol. There are 4 tocopherols and 4
tocotrienols. The molecule exerting the best antioxidant action is ɑ-Tocopherol, so that’s what
supplements provide. Vitamin E has a strong antioxidant activity, as said above.
● Vitamin B12
We spoke about this when talking about anemia. Vitamin B12 or methylcobalamin is an important
co-factor in the synthesis of B12. It is present in food of animal origin like meat or milk and it is taken
up by the protein. To be absorbed at the level of the intestine
needs to be bound to this violet molecule (fig.9) that is
intrinsic factor.
The intrinsic factor is produced and released by the parietal
cells of the stomach and binds vitamin B12 and at the level of
the intestine the intrinsic factor binds to specific receptors and
in this way the binding of B12 can be passive. I want to focus
on the intrinsic factor that is necessary. The lacking of vitamin
B12 can be due both to a primary malnutrition (like veganism,
because they do not eat foods of animal origin) or it can be
due to a secondary malnutrition for example chronic gastritis
conditions in which the cells of the stomach are not able to
produce the intrinsic factor. It can be also due to conditions at
the level of the intestine in which the receptor for intrinsic
factor are not exposed or there is an inflammatory condition
that avoids the binding and the absorption of the complex
vitamin B12-intrisic factor. Or there is another disease, that is
pernicious anemia. It is an autoimmune condition in which
there are auto-antibodies directly against the gastric parietal
cells. So these antibodies block the production of the intrinsic
factor or they can be directly against the intrinsic factor itself
and in this case it is not able to bind the vitamin B12 or against
cubilin, which is the receptor. In this case B12 is assumed, but
Fig. 9
cannot be absorbed. Also pernicious anemia is a cause of
secondary malnutrition. The consequence is a megaloblastic anemia. At the level of the bone
marrow these proerythroblasts are bigger than normal because they are trying to divide, but the
DNA is impaired. So bigger erythroblasts are present in the bone marrow and usually they die in the
bone marrow, so it is an intramedullary death of the precursors of the red blood cells. The
consequence is an insufficient erythropoiesis, few erythrocytes are released in the blood and those
few are bigger than normal. These macrocytic erythrocytes are often destroyed also in circulation.
Folic acid and vitamin B12 are similar in the symptomatology. Pregnant ladies are given folic acid
supplementation independently of their serum concentration, because there’s no problem with
hyperaccumulation and it’s important to have sufficient folic acid for DNA synthesis. Folic acid and
vitamin B12 behave in a similar way but with an exception: only vitamin B12, in case of deficiency,
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
58
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
is able to induce neurological symptoms. They are very important in nucleic acid synthesis and in
the synthesis of the heme group. This activity is essential, otherwise you would have megaloblastic
anemia.
● Vitamin K
Vitamin K can have two different sources: vegetables (K2) and our microbiota, good commensals
are producing vitamin K1 for us. We don’t really face any hypervitaminosis with vitamin K. Vitamin
K is important in blood clotting and a decrease in vitamin K you have derangement of blood
coagulation.
Hydrosoluble vitamins don’t give hypervitaminosis, you can eat as much as you want and they don’t
accumulate, the body removes the excess. But there are different deficiencies, and some of them
are of interest in the REDOX biology of our body. Some vitamins belonging to the B family are
important in redox biology, regulating oxidative and reductive processes.
● Thiamine, B1
It is important in regulating carbohydrate metabolism. Deficiency of this vitamin leads especially to
neurological problems. Beri-Beri is a syndrome not frequent anymore but typical of the far East,
where the diet was deficient in particular of vitamin B1. The symptomatology was characterized by
immunological problems, intestinal problems and cardiovascular problems.
● Vitamin B2 and B3
They are important in the redox regulation of different functions of our cells and organs. They are
so important because they are the main component of coenzymes FAD, NAD and NADPH. Vitamin
A, E, B2, B3, C are important in the redox regulation of many functions. The main biochemical
pathways regulating metabolism and functions in cells are dependent on calcium, on
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation and on reduction and oxidation.
● Vitamin B6 and B7 are important in different metabolisms, in particular in the structure and
function of skeletal muscle.
A
DVERSE REACTIONS TO FOOD
They can be
1. toxic reactions, they are intoxications, there is not individual difference
2. non toxic reactions, could be
a. due to altered immune response (=allergies)
i. IgE dependent
ii. non-IgE dependent (characterized by other types of immunoglobulins that
are produced)
iii. mixed
a. not of immunologic order (=intolerances, which are difficult to diagnose)
i. enzymatic type
ii. pharmacologic type
iii. induced by food additives
1. Toxic type (intoxications)
There is not any distinction among individuals so the toxin hit all of us. There are different types of
toxins: from poisonous mushrooms like Amanita phalloides, Amanita verna, Amanita virosa which
may be fatal; then from contaminants of food stuff, when the storage is not adequate (like in the
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
59
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
so called biological foods) we can have the growth of dangerous microorganisms e.g. aspergillus
which produces aflatoxins. The carcinogenic properties of these compounds imply that the
consumption is repeated along the time, along the years. More common and frequent are
intoxications because of Clostridium Botulinum, Staphylococcus Aureus and Salmonella Typhi.
Intoxications are involved in all the people assuming the contaminated food.
Fig. 10
2a. Allergies
This are adverse reactions to foods that are non toxic. They
are very diffused. They can be IgE dependent or not, for
example in the case of IgA or IgG antibodies. The latter is the
case of the celiac disease, which is a non toxic adverse
reaction to food non IgE mediated and can be considered
also an autoimmune disorder, but is wrong to consider it as
an intolerance. The food allergies mediated by IgE can be
mediated by allergens and is characterized by the release of
IgE. Usually give symptoms in a few minutes, hours so the
reaction is fast, acute, sometimes very strong as in the case
of anaphylaxis. An allergen stimulates the production of IgE.
IgE are bound specifically to the mast cells, that we saw in
acute inflammations. They are rich in granules that contain
a lot of inflammatory mediators like histamine. In case of
repeated exposure to allergen, so a second exposure to the
allergen, the latter finds already IgE on the surface of mast
cells so the binding of the allergen with the IgE leads to the
explosive degranulation of the mast cells, and so all the
vasoactive amines and histamine are released causing the
allergic reaction. This is just to say that IgE mediated
allergies are characterized by IgE production and
degranulation of the mast cells.
On the contrary, the allergies not mediated by IgE, but still mediated by improper reaction of the
innate immunity, show a late onset of symptoms. To complicate the all picture there is an increasing
number of conditions characterized by IgE and non IgE mediated symptoms: you have the symptoms
from the very beginning lasting for hours or days.
Mechanism of allergies (figure below): allergens start the first phase of sensitization of cells, in
particular mastocytes and basophils that start expressing on the surface IgE and it is only the second
encounter with the same or similar allergen because of the reaction of IgE on the surface of the cell,
there is a massive, acute release of inflammatory mediators like histamine and prostaglandins that
cause the allergic reaction which leads to local and systemic symptoms in particular conjunctivitis,
nasal allergy, asthma, urticaria.
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
60
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
Fig. 11
The symptoms of IgE mediated food allergies: the
individual reaction can be specific so symptoms
depend on the single individual and also on the
amount of sensitizing bacteria.
More frequent causes of IgE mediated
inflammatory reactions, local or systemic: milk,
wheat, eggs.
The cross reactivity of different allergens: the
reaction is not triggered only by the same allergen
that made the sensitization but also by a close
structure allergen.
Fig. 12
Here is just a list of non IgE mediated allergies: the first 3 are enteropathies (colitis,
proctocolitis), they are occurring very early in the childhood and are characterized by abnormal
innate immune responses to some protein content of a given food.
The T helper reactions could be mainly driven by type 1 and 2. Another similarity is the
involvement of inflammatory cells, dendritic cells, production of proinflammatory cytokines.
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
61
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
Regarding eosinophilic GI disorders, they could
be divided into esophagitis, gastritis,
enterocolitis. In this case you have a mixed
condition in which IgE is present but not only
IgE so it is a IgE non IgE dependent condition.
Again, usually in these disorders the
inflammation is T helper 2 type.
The response mediated by Th1 is mainly leading
to activation of cytotoxic T cells response while
Th2 response, typical of allergies, is producing
antibodies.
Fig. 13
Fig. 14
C
ELIAC DISEASE
This disease is very diffused. The incidence is 1 out of 100 people so it is pretty common.
Also in literature, celiac disease is commonly called gluten intolerance or an autoimmune disorder
without going in depth about the etiology, BUT IT IS NOT AN INTOLERANCE, it is an autoimmune
disease. Also in the texts it is difficult to define it. What is sure is that this is a non-IgE mediated
food allergy. It is an immune mediated disorder that can be also considered an autoimmune
disorder because the immunoglobulin produced can also attack cells and tissue and it triggered by
the ingestion of gluten-containing foods and also other foods that are naturally gluten-free but
they may be contaminated by gluten because they are made in the same laboratory in which gluten
is used. IgE are not involved, the celiac disease is in between allergies and intolerances. Allergies
and autoimmune diseases are close.
Symptoms are different, but only some people will show this adverse reaction and the reaction will
be different among different celiac patients. They include digestive problems, anemia, skin rash,
and joint pain, in children also growth retardation.
It is a disease that causes secondary malnutrition, due to malabsorption of the main components of
the diet only when the patients eats these kinds of food containing gluten. The gluten-free diet
completely restores the normal condition.
The prevalence of the disease varies in different regions and depends on the wheat consumption.
In some papers it is written that in countries in which wheat is widely used, like in Western countries,
the celiac disease is more diffused. It may also depend on age in which wheat has been given to
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
62
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
babies. This disease can occur in young children but also in adults, between the ages of 30 and 60.
It is characterized by chronic diarrhea, bloating, or chronic fatigue, but is often asymptomatic. There
are patients that if they eat some gluten have no symptoms while others have acute ones. These
cases may present with anemia due to chronic iron and vitamin malabsorption.
P
ATHOGENESIS OF CELIAL DISEASE
Fig. 15
When celiac disease is active (when
the patients eats gluten), it is
characterized by the loss of villi in
the intestine.
The main problem with celiac
disease is structural change of the
upper part of the small intestine
(duodenum, jejunum) where the
majority of villi are present. You
could have maybe only a
lymphocytic inflammation, so
typical of chronic type and then
damage of the villi so flattened
mucosa. There are different degrees
of severity of syntomps. The picture shows you normal and flattened villi.
We have a flattening of the villi by the increase number of intraepithelial lymphocytes and the
increase mitosis of the enterocytes. Gluten is digested into lipopeptides creating some aminoacids
and also lipopeptides that cannot be digested like gliadin. Gliadin is a 33 amino acid peptide. Gliadin
stimulates enterocytes to produce zonulin. Zonulin binds specific receptors on the enterocytes and
this binding leads to the contraction of enterocytes and the destruction of tight junctions. Gliadin is
present at the surface of the lumen of our intestine stimulates the enterocytes to produce
interleukin 15. Interleukin 15 is able to stimulate the proliferation of the intraepithelial
lymphocytes. The intraepithelial lymphocytes express on their surface this marker, NKG2D (not
important to remember), and it is important because it allows the lymphocytes to recognize the
enterocytes that have expressed MIC-A (ligand of the marker) and it is expressed by those
enterocytes that are under stress (for example inflammation, altered microbiota and other stimuli).
The epithelial lymphocytes attack the enterocytes expressing MIC-A and they destroy them, so they
die of necrosis. Moreover in this way some spaces are created between the enterocytes and gliadin
passes and enters the epithelium. At the same time gliadin also stimulates the epithelial cells to
produce a molecule called osteogen that destroys the tight junctions, such as occludin, that are
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
63
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
binding the enterocytes creating new spaces in which gliadin can pass.
Gliadin when enters the epithelium it finds an enzyme (the green one fig.16) that is tissue
transglutaminase (tTG) that is released by the damaged cells. It is an enzyme of enterocytes and in
case of destruction of enterocytes it is released. The role of the enzyme is to deamidate the gliadin.
So we have now a deaminidated gliadin. The deaminidated gliadin binds specifically to HLA-DQ2 or
HLA-DQ8 that are present in the celiac disease patient that are on the surface antigen presenting
cells (APC). In turn this binding brings the activation of lymphocytes that produces specific
antibodies that are IgA or IgG directed against gliadin, so they are antigliadin antibodies and anti-
tTG that recognize the enzyme tissue transglutaminase and also anti-endomysium, that is that part
of the subendothelium exposed at the damage of the endothethelial cells that expose the basal
lamina and the endomesium. These antibodies reach the endomysium that is a self tissue, but it is
normally not exposed. In this way, celiac disease can be considered an autoimmune disorder,
because of the presence of these antibodies. When the antigliadin antibodies and anti-tTG act near
the endothelium they damage even more the endothelium. So the cause of the destruction of the
enterocytes are the intraepithelial leukocytes that directly kill the enterocytes or the antigliadin
antibodies and anti-tTG that attack in
Fig. 16
the nearby of the enterocytes or the
anti-endomysium antibodies.
There is another type of diagnosis, the
genetic diagnosis.
So the trigger element is gluten, which
is not a single protein but a complex of
proteins. Some of us that develop
enterocytes are processing the gluten in
an improper way - those affected by
celiac disease.
Usually enterocytes endocytose gluten,
fragment it and express on the surface
to the MHC receptors in a way to give
tolerance to that component of gluten.
In some people there is a different expression of these receptors, the DQ types, and in an unusual
way the DQ receptors expressed on the surface of enterocytes are of the class DQ2, DQ8.
In this way, the cytotoxic T lymphocytes are recruited and activated and you have a cytotoxic
reaction against the cells expressing on the surface DQ2 and DQ8.
Here there is the second method of diagnosis: the genetic analysis of DQ class, you find DQ2 and
DQ8 highly expressed. There is a genetic predisposition and a genetic analysis can be done to
understand if in the family there are cases of celiac disorder not to test continuously every year the
antibodies or perform other invasive exams but analyze if there are HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 on the
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
64
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
APC. This indicates a predisposition, not a
Fig. 17
sure condition of celiac disease.
From necrotic cells you have material
released and some of it could act as antigens
now, you could have antibodies, not IgE,
against transglutaminase, also against
endomysium, so antibodies like
transglutaminase - the most used as lab
marker for celiac disease. To treat it (which is
not sufficient of course to treat celiac
disease) we can prescribe antibodies against
transglutaminase.
These are the symptoms (of course present only when gluten is eaten):
Digestive symptoms are more common in children and can include:
•feeling of fullness or swelling in the abdomen
•chronic diarrhea
•constipation
•gas
•nausea
•pale, foul-smelling, fatty stools
•stomach pain
•vomiting
Adults are less likely to have digestive symptoms and, instead, may have one or more of the
following:
•anemia
•bone or joint pain
•depression or anxiety
•dermatitis herpetiformis
•headaches
•infertility or repeated miscarriage
•missed menstrual periods
•seizures
These are the exams that can be done to understand if a person is celiac.
Detection in vitro of:
- IgA anti-Transglutaminase
- IgG anti-Transglutaminase
- IgA anti-endomisium
In vivo the final conclusive diagnosis of celiac disease is just made by endoscopy because you see
altered small intestine mucosa, maybe in the bioptic sample you see just a lymphocytic infiltration
(the first degree of celiac disease) or you recognize an already damaged villi. These antibodies
determine the atrophy and the loss of the villi of the intestine. This is clinical manifestation of the
celiac disease. This happens always when a celiac patient eats some gluten by mistake, because also
a little amount of gluten or a contamination may cause the atrophy of the villi and the clinical
manifestations. It can also be asymptomatic. The celiac person even if asymptomatic, it does not
mean that they can eat gluten, because also in asymptomatic patients it changes the structure of
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
65
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
the villi and may bring to cancer. This is because a change in the differentiation in the morphology
of the cells is always due to changes at the level of the DNA, some genes are overexpressed while
other are downregulated. It may lead eventually to mutation and cancer if the gluten free diet is not
followed.
Question: do we call celiac disease precancerosis or is simply a predisposition?
Answer: no, because if the diet is followed the intestines are normal, there is not atrophy of the villi.
The atrophy of the villi occurs in patients that do not follow the diet because they are asymptomatic
and maybe they do not know. In that case it is a precancerous condition.
This (fig.18) is the proposed screening algorithm for celiac disease. It seems complicated but I like
to explain this because it can be useful. Here (top of the image) we have a patient with signs and
symptoms (anemia, diarrhea and some general malaise). He first thing to do is to measure IgA anti-
Transglutaminase, but also the total IgA to understand if the total quantity of IgA is normal,
otherwise identifying a specific type of IgA may be difficult. If there is a positive result for IgA anti-
Transglutaminase, we have to perform the duodenal biopsy. If there is a positive result, we see the
atrophy of the villi and there is the certain diagnosis of celiac disease. Otherwise, if the IgA anti-
Transglutaminase result is negative, we cannot exclude celiac disease because have have to
evaluate whether the total IgA is lower than normal. If they are lower than normal we have to
measure the other antibodies created in celiac disease: IgG anti-Transglutaminase and IgA anti-
endomisium. If they are positive, the biopsy is performed and if the biopsy is positive the celiac
disease diagnosis is confermed. Otherwise if the total IgA are normal and the anti-Transglutaminase
are negative, it is unlikely that we have a celiac disease and the biopsy is not performed since it is
an invasive procedure.
Fig. 18
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
66
24.03.2023 GAMBA L.5
2b. Intolerances
We can now spend some time on food intolerances. They are difficult to diagnose but if you are not
able to find any type of immunoglobulins you should consider the possibility of facing an
intolerance. Intolerances could recognize enzymatic, pharmacological, food additives mechanisms.
Lactose intolerance is more frequent than celiac disease. Lactose is a disaccharide. The most
famous is lactose intolerance due to a deficit of lactase, the enzymes able to digest lactose dividing
it in glucose and galactose. Lactase is present on the brush border of the small intestine. Deficit
does not mean absence. If lactase is not present or present in low amounts, lactose remains as a
disaccharide in the lumen and so as a consequence water brings to a very severe diarrhea. An
intolerance is different from, for example, celiac disease in which we have an immune response.
There are foods that contain histamine or other vasoactive amines and that if consumed together
with an allergen, a reaction can occur. Or if we ingest foods that stimulate the degranulation of mast
cells and the consequence is the release of histamine. It is not a immune reaction, because it is not
the immune system that reacts but these foods already contain vasoactive amines.
She will not ask all the foods cited in the slides, they are only added for our interest.
Now there are very good tests to detect lactose intolerance: breath test in which you measure
hydrogen produced by respiration. The lactose is not broken down so it is fermented by our
microbiota so consequently you have bloating, gut pain and diarrhea. The lactose intolerance
incidence is 30-40% but it is important the degree of severity.
Another intolerance due to enzymatic mechanisms is the intolerance to ethanol: ladies are much
less tolerant to alcohol than men because they have 30% less alcohol dehydrogenase in the
stomach. Eastern people do not tolerate alcohol like western people because they have different
isotypes of alcohol dehydrogenase (more active) so they produce more acetaldehyde and less active
aldehyde dehydrogenase so the steady state amount of acetaldehyde is higher than western people.
Food intolerances of pharmacological type are very frequent. There are foods containing high
amounts of vasoactive amines, for instance fermented cheese, milk as well, giving a reaction similar
to that occurring in allergies. The difference in the reactions between people is in the ability to
eliminate vasoactive amines. Vasoactive amines may trigger the same reactions occurring in
allergies. You could become intolerant just once because you ingest too many vasoactive amines: in
this case it is an episode, I am not intolerant. The disease condition is when every time I eat, for
example, gorgonzola, I am intolerant so it is a disease condition.
There are foods able to favor degranulation of mastocytes, so you have a pseudoallergic condition
but you do not find antibodies. These are difficult to diagnose, usually it is used in a food diary.
In addition there are some foods that are inhibitors of the normal catabolism of serotonin (5-
hydroxytryptamine), so inhibitors of monoaminoxidase, and in the case of histamine inhibition of
diamine oxidase. Often the situation is complex so you have bigger content of vasoactive amines
and also presence of inhibitors of amine catabolism and eventually in the case of histamine and
serotonin, the catabolism leads to the production of imidazole acetate that means that aldehyde
dehydrogenase is important. So the best competitive inhibitor of diamine oxidase or monoamine
oxidase, meaning a good substrate for aldehyde dehydrogenase is alcohol. If I eat food rich in
histamine and I drink alcohol I impari the histamine removal and I keep the histamine levels high.
Finally, the food intolerances could be due to ingestion of food additives: sulphites (present in wine,
they are stressors of gastric mucosa), sodium benzoate (probably it causes impairment of
vasoactive amines catabolism). Glutamate is still considered as a possible cause of food intolerance
but it is still debated.
Carolina Gervasio. Fereshteh Tarakemeh
67
