03.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.02
ATHEROSCLEROSIS
Having already seen the lipoproteins, we can start talking about atherosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis is a progressive and chronic degenerative disease, affecting the intima of large and medium-
sized arteries of elastic and muscle-elastic type.
The starting point is a chronic inflammatory response.
The disease involves:
- intima thickening
- loss of wall elasticity
- presence of typical lesion called “atheroma” or “atherosclerotic plaque”
A : C D
THEROMA HARACTERISTICS AND EVELOPMENT
• accumulation of lipids in sub-endothelial area (in the intima), carried by LDL
• presence of fibroinflammatory reaction:
o continuous cell migration (monocytes mainly);
o sclerosis (abundant collagen fibers with numerous intermolecular connections loss of
elasticity). Smooth muscle cells in the intima migrate to intima and secrete collagen fibers.
The morphology is of a patchy white-yellow lesion growing on the lumen of the artery, involving only a
portion of the arterial wall.
The principal arteries that are affected by this progressive degenerative disease are:
- coronary arteries
- arteries of the cerebral circulation
- internal carotid arteries
- abdominal and thoracic aorta
- iliac arteries
- femoral arteries
- popliteal arteries
This disease is totally absent in capillaries, veins, and lymphatic circulation.
It usually happens at the level of curvatures and bifurcations: this is due to higher pressure and turbulence,
that can favor the formation of these lesions.
A M
THEROSCLEROSIS IS ULTIFACTORIAL
Multiple risk factors can increase the risk of developing atherosclerosis. Risk factors can divide into modifiable
and non-modifiable.
➢ Modifiable risk factors:
1. Hyperlipidemia: due to hypertriglyceridemia but mostly hypercholesterolemia (per se sufficient
to develop atherosclerosis). An increased amount of cholesterol concentration will cause the
increase of LDL, lipoproteins which carry lipids from the liver to the body (lipids can’t be present
in the blood alone). This cholesterol can be defined as “bad cholesterol”, due to its ability to
increase the risk of forming atherosclerosis. HDL, on the other hand, collects all the cholesterol
not used or derived from the turnover of membrane cells. The excessive cholesterol is carried
from peripheral tissues to the liver. The balance between these lipoproteins is very important: a
higher LDL/HDL ratio is associated with atherosclerosis.
To avoid the risk it is possible to decrease LDL and raise HDL through diet, exercise (increases
HDL) and drugs (that either lower LDL or total cholesterol or raise HDL).
Alessandra Giorgi, Beatriz Vitorino
23
03.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.02
To sum up, hypercholesterolemia causes are:
- increased LDL cholesterol levels
- decreased HDL cholesterol levels
- increased levels of abnormal lipoprotein (altered form of LDL: apo B-100 linked to apo A)
- hypercholesterolemia ROS production EC dysfunction
2. Hypertension (especially systolic): in arterial circulation the pressure is high, but in case of
hypertension the high pressure can cause a disfunction of endothelium (especially in curvatures
and bifurcations). The hypertension can cause damage to artery walls.
3. Diabetes mellitus: characterized by hyperglycemia (explained in detail in Gamba’s “Diabetes
mellitus” lesson). Glucagon mobilizes lipids in adipose tissue in order to obtain energy causing
hypercholesterolemia. Glucose that is free in the circulation can also bind to proteins of the
inflamed arterial wall increasing the inflammatory response.
4. Cigarette smoking: hydrocarbon radicals and nicotine are produced through smoking, and both
can stimulate growth factors and inflammatory process at the level of arterial walls.
➢ Constitutional risk factors (non-modifiable):
1. Genetic factors: hypertension, diabetes and hypercholesterolemia can be familial diseases
with a genetic basis. Familial hypercholesterolemia, for example, is an autosomal dominant
due to absence or defect of the hepatic receptor for LDL.
2. Age: can start at the age of 20-50 staying asymptomatic. It can become symptomatic starting
at the age of 40-60.
3. Gender: more frequent in men than premenopausal women (protected by estrogens), as
well as the risk of myocardial infarction.
➢ Additional risk factors (non-modifiable):
1. Hyperhomocysteinemia (methionine metabolite): high levels of homocysteine (if present in
urine = homocystinuria). Due to rare inborn errors of metabolism (autosomal recessive
disease). The effects are:
a. endothelial lesion (inducing ROS production)
b. inhibition of anticoagulative, antithrombotic, and vasodilator systems induced by
nitric oxide
c. contribution of inflammatory response
2. Inflammation: C reactive protein (CRP) produced during inflammation --> contribute to
inflammatory state by increasing production of inflammatory mediators. It is a strong marker
for myocardial infarction and stroke.
3. Lack of exercise, obesity, dietary, stressful life style (like alcohol abuse)
4. Viral infections (e.g. Chlamydia pneumoniae and cytomegalovirus)
These factors are not fundamental but can increase the risk.
Q.: I didn’t understand the role of the C reactive protein.
A.: The C reactive protein is one of the APP. During the inflammatory response there are ways to recognize
this state, like increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (SED: velocity of sedimentation in erythrocytes) due
to increased APP, including CRP. An increased level of CRP leads to higher risk of atherosclerosis. The start of
atherosclerosis is always due to inflammation, caused by one or more of the risk factors mentioned above.
CRP can contribute to inflammation by producing other inflammatory mediators.
Alessandra Giorgi, Beatriz Vitorino
24
03.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.02
“R ”
ESPONSE TO INJURY HYPOTHESIS
Atherosclerosis can be a response to injury.
1. The risk factors are responsible of a disfunction of the endothelium (not properly a lesion but an
inflammation). The endothelium is impermeable, so the cells can’t adhere. But when the
endothelium starts to lose its anticoagulant and antifibrinolytic ability the cells can attach to the
endothelium.
2. Due to the disfunction there is an increase in permeability, so that the LDL rich in cholesterol starts
to cross in the endothelium and to accumulate in the intima. Following the accumulation in the
intima there is an accumulation of monocytes, that start to differentiate and phagocyte the LDL with
the aim to remove all of it. This response to injury is protective because it can remove the LDL.
A P
THEROSCLEROSIS ATHOGENESIS
1. Chronic endothelial injury and dysfuction: increased vascular
permeability, leukocyte adhesion
2. Accumulation of lipoproteins in the intima: in the vessel wall;
mainly LDL and oxidized LDL. Here the lipids and apoproteins get
oxidized, and particularly oxidized LDL is the main atherogenic
element, responsible for the lesion.
3. Monocyte adhesion to the endothelium: migration into the intima,
differentiation into macrophages “foam cells” (due to lipid
accumulation within them they have these bubbles appearing
within them)
4. Platelet adhesion
5. Inflammatory factor release: from all the cells involved
6. Smooth muscle cell migration to sub endothelium: proliferation,
ECM production, especially collagen (SMC start to act as
fibroblasts: modify their morphology and start to look and act like
fibroblasts), and T cell recruitment
7. Atherosclerotic plaque formation: composed by a central necrotic
(lipid) chore, full of extracellular and intracellular lipids. Given that
lipids are cytotoxic the cells start to die and release them outside.
Cells, lipids form the necrotic chore. Under the endothelium there
is fibrotic tissue (collagen fibers) called fibrotic cap, responsible
for the rigidity of the arterial wall.
The main causes of endothelium dysfunction, as already mentioned, are:
- Hemodynamic disturbances: turbulence (especially in curvatures)
- Hypercholesterolemia (sufficient to cause endothelial
disfunction). Definable as >200 mg/dl of cholesterol. The professor
repeats the causes seen in the modifiable risks.
fig.1
Alessandra Giorgi, Beatriz Vitorino
25
03.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.02
In fig. 2 it is possile to see the composiiton of LDL.
fig.2
R LDL
OLE OF OX S
LDLs become very dangerous when they are oxidized because they have a high atherogenic activity. OxLDLs
have different actions:
- Macrophages can uptake the oxLDL through the scavenger receptor, especially CD36, and LDL itself
can induce the expression/synthesis of it
- Increase the synthesis and release of cytokines and GF ((e.g. TGFβ1, MCP-1) by vascular cells
(macrophages, T cells, platelets ecc).
- chemotactic for circulating monocytes and contribute to their differentiation
- increase the adhesion of monocytes by induction of adhesion molecules by ECs
- inhibit the mobility of macrophages residing in the intima
- cytotoxic for vascular cells
- induce the proliferation of SMCs
- activate T lymphocytes and platelets
- stimulate MMP expression in macrophages and reduce TIMP expression
S
EQUENCE OF CELLULAR INTERACTION IN ATHEROSCLEROSIS
The crosstalk of the cells involved in atherosclerosis is very important. Each cell stimulates the other cells to
release a huge number of inflammatory mediators, cytokines, GF ecc.. The cells stimulate in particular the
macrophages and the smooth muscle cells.
1. Chronic hyperlipidemia: endothelium disfunction followed by increased permeability allows LDLs to
accumulate within the intima, where they may aggregate or become oxidized by free radicals
produced by inflammatory cells.
2. Migration of macrophages and uptake of oxLDL through scavenger receptors (e.g. CD36) inducing
the formation of “foam cells”. Their death will release the oxLDL.
3. SMCs can similarly transform into “foam cells” and produce ECM
oxLDs stimulate the release of adhesion molecules, growth factors, cytokines, chemokines, etc
- monocyte recruitment and macrophage activation
- SMC proliferation and migration
- matrix synthesis
Alessandra Giorgi, Beatriz Vitorino
26
03.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.02
fig.2
In the fig. … it
is possible to see an atherosclerotic plaque in a
human carotid artery. The squared region contains
the atheroma:
- brown staining of the CD36 of the
macrophages
- green staining of the CD68 of macrophages
- green fluorescent staining of Apo-B100
- red staining of lipids
fig. 3
Any risk factor can cause endothelial dysfunction by increasing the permeability of endothelium. The
increased permeability allows LDL to cross the endothelium, passing from the blood into the intima. Our body
tries to avoid the change of location of LDL through a defense mechanism that consists in monocytes that
start to migrate into the intima, here they differentiate into macrophages with the purpose of phagocytosing
LDL. Sometimes, in the beginning, macrophages are able to remove all the LDL, so this condition can be
reversible, but this is not always possible, that’s why is important to eliminate the risk factors responsible for
endothelial dysfunction to avoid completely the passage of LDL from the blood to the intima. If the risk factor
is present for months or years, the damage is not reversible, and the endothelial dysfunction causes the
accumulation of LDL in the intima and the consequent formation of atheroma.
P D A
ATHOGENESIS AND EVELOPMENT OF THEROMA
In the pathogenesis of atheroma two phases can be distinguished:
• Pre-Clinical Phase → In this phase atheroma is developing without symptoms (slowly and
progressively, can take years). Usually young age.
• Clinical Phase → In this phase the clinical manifestations arise. Usually middle age to elderly.
Alessandra Giorgi, Beatriz Vitorino
27
03.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.02
fig. 4
PRE-CLINICAL PHASE
1. Fatty Streak (at this point the lesion can be reversible)
o
Fatty streak is a yellow and flat lesion slightly protruding in the lumen.
o
Lipids start to accumulate in the intima without disturbing the circulation (because it does
not accumulate in the lumen of the artery, but in the intima).
o
Is composed mainly by LDL and macrophages which start to phagocytose the LDL to remove
it. At the beginning, some yellow, small spots can be observed, later these spots can form
one large, elongated fatty streak.
o
Appear early in age: in the 20s or in infants, always before 40s.
o
Can regress if the dysfunction of the
endothelium stops (by removing the risk
factors) and all the LDL is removed by
macrophages. Otherwise, if the risk
factors persist the atheroma forms.
o
The progression process from fatty
streaks to fibrofatty plaque takes
months, or even years, since it’s a
chronic inflammation.
fig. 5
fig. 7 fig.8
Alessandra Giorgi, Beatriz Vitorino
28
03.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.02
Fig. 7 and fig. 8 are examples of initial atheroma, the beginning of the formation of the fatty streak. In the
images, the foam cells and macrophages full of lipids can be observed.
2. Fibrofatty Plaque (in addition to lipids the fibrotic tissue starts to
form)
o
Is a white/white-yellow intimal thickening which tends
to protrude into the lumen of the artery due to the
increased accumulation of cells and lipids (it partially
occupies the lumen of the artery). The clinical
manifestations are not present yet but the
compromission of the circulation starts.
fig. 9
o
The migration in the intima of LDL, macrophages and T-
lymphocytes occurs.
o
Thanks to inflammatory mediators released by vascular cells and by the oxidized LDL, smooth
muscle cells are stimulated and start to migrate and to proliferate, modifying their
morphology and functions: they transform into myofibroblasts responsible for the
production of the extracellular matrix (mainly collagen) causing the thickening of the cell wall
(they are not fibroblasts, but they are muscle cells acting like fibroblasts). Therefore, the
formation of the fibrotic tissue occurs slowly, causing rigidity (loss of elasticity).
3. Advanced/Vulnerable Plaque
o
Atheroma causes a critical reduction of the lumen of the artery due to months/years of
accumulation of lipids. As the plaque enlarges and protrudes into the lumen causes critical
stenosis.
o
The area under the epithelium is deformed due to the formation of the fibrotic tissue. This
fibrotic atheroma is called “fibrotic cap” and is made mainly by collagen. The presence of the
fibrotic cap is responsible for the rigidity of the wall and can also protect the atheromic cells
allowing the plaque to be stronger.
o
There is the formation of new blood vessels (neovascularization) inside the plaque, a
continuous recruitment of blood cells, proliferation of smooth muscle cells and extracellular
matrix.
o
The accumulation of oxidized LDL takes place mainly in macrophages, but also in smooth
muscle cells. The presence of these lipids in the cytoplasm is toxic, as a consequence the cells
start to die, release outside the oxidized LDL phagocytosed before. The center of the
atheroma is formed: is composed of debris (necrotic cells), foam cells and extracellular lipids
and is called the “necrotic core” or “lipid core”.
Other areas where advanced plaque can be observed:
• An area with calcium deposition (area of calcification) that can contribute to the rigidity of
the wall;
• An area with cholesterol crystals accumulation
Both are responsible for loss of elasticity: The artery cannot anymore change its diameter
(vasoconstriction/vasodilation) because the wall is rigid.
Alessandra Giorgi, Beatriz Vitorino
29
03.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.02
fig.10
Fig.10: The central part of the plaque is called necrotic core and is composed of necrotic cells, foam cells, cholesterol
crystals, calcification, and intra/extracellular lipids. The fibrotic cap is composed of fibrotic tissue mainly composed of
collagen, new vessels and other elements all contributing to the rigidity of the wall.
There are two types of advanced plaque:
1. Stable Plaque → The necrotic core is small
in size. There is less inflammation and the
fibrous cap is very thick and strong (can
protect the atheromic cells).
Stenosis of the vessel with reduction of
the lumen (kind of vasoconstriction) is
present, thus the pressure is higher and
the blood has difficulty in flowing through.
Normally, the increased pressure can
easily break the plaque that protrudes in
the lumen, however, as long as the fibrous
cap is thick and strong, it prevents the
break of the plaque.
fig. 11
2. Unstable (Vulnerable) Plaque → Very big
necrotic core and strong inflammatory state. The fibrous cap is thin, atheroma is not strong and so
the pressure of the blood can easily provoke the rupture of the plaque. The integrity of the fibrous
cap depends on the production and degradation of the matrix components: if there is a high
production of MMPs and a decreased production of TIMPs, the matrix will be degraded and the
fibrous cap becomes thin and breaks easily.
CLINICAL PHASE
Usually occurs in middle-aged or elderly people.
Clinical phase is characterized by progressive growth of the plaque (the plaque grows very slowly). It is
impossible for the plaque to grow enough to completely occlude the tubule, there are clinical manifestations
caused by critical steatosis before (e.g. hypoxia of the myocardium, which is called “angina pectoris”, caused
by reduction of oxygen).
When the plaque breaks the formation of a thrombus can immediately take place. If it occurs on the top of
a plaque that already is protruding and partially occluding the lumen of the artery, the risk of the total
occlusion of the artery (infarction) is very high.
Alessandra Giorgi, Beatriz Vitorino
30
03.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.02
Plaque rupture occurs most frequently in the shoulder region (point
between the normal endothelium and the plaque itself), where the
cap is very thin and has the highest infiltration of foam cells
(macrophages).
With the rupture of the endothelium, the pro-thrombotic factors
present on exposed SMCs (for example thromboplastin aka tissue
factor) can come in contact with the extrinsic coagulation factors.
The contact of the coagulation factor with the plaque itself can
immediately stimulate the coagulation cascade (the recruitment and
fig. 12
the activation of the platelets, an extrinsic coagulation cascade). This
process results in the formation of an abnormal clot aka thrombus immediately on the top of the plaque
(abnormal because no hemorrhage is present, but the process is the same).
After the exposition of the sub-endothelial basement the blood has higher thrombogenic properties that can
provoke the aggregation of platelets, fibrin activation and formation of an abnormal clot called thrombus.
The plaque already partially occludes the lumen, grow slowly hampering the circulation (very rarely it totally
occludes the artery). It causes a critical stenosis with partial occlusion and ischemia. The true severe risk is
the rupture: the thrombus (usually) completely occludes the lumen, causing infarction and stroke.
C A P
OMPLICATIONS OF THEROMATOUS LAQUE
1. Calcification → Deposition of calcium salts that contribute to the stiffness of the artery wall
2. Hemorrhage → Rupture of the fibrous cap or of the thin-walled vessels in the areas of
neovascularization (due to high blood pressure) cause intraplaque hemorrhage and consequently
plaque expansion.
3. Plaque ulceration, erosion, or rupture → Exposure of substances with aggregating and highly
thrombogenic properties that result in thrombus formation which may partially or completely
occlude the vessel lumen
4. Thrombosis → Rupture of the plaque is the most important trigger: it immediately stimulates the
release of tissue factors that cause the deposition of thrombogenic constituents which induce the
activation of platelets and so the formation of a thrombus.
5. Embolism → a) dissolution of the thrombus in fragments → emboli → complete occlusion of vessels
with a smaller diameter. b) following rupture, necrotic debris and/or so-called cholesterol crystals
(that can’t mix with blood) emboli may be released into the bloodstream → micro emboli.
6. Aneurysm → Very dangerous complication that can occur when there is an advanced plaque (quite
frequent in the aorta due to the very high pressure). In this case, instead of growing inside the lumen,
the plaque pushes in the opposite direction. The plaque is then responsible for the atrophy of the
media layer that loses its elasticity and becomes weak due to the progressive thinning. An aneurysm
is an enlargement of the artery. The walls become bulged causing the formation of turbulence which
can contribute to an inflammatory state. The artery has a high risk to break causing a very severe
hemorrhage that can also cause the death of the patient for hemorrhagic or hypovolemic shock.
Alessandra Giorgi, Beatriz Vitorino
31
03.04.2023 LEONARDUZZI L.02
fig.13
a) Stenosis of the lumen
b) Thrombus formation and embolism
c) Intraplaque hemorrhage
d) Aneurysm formation
From a clinical point of view, the complications depend on the size of the plaque.
When the atheroma occludes the artery partially, some pathological conditions caused by hypoxia can occur.
- partial occlusion occurs in the carotid arteries → risk is to develop dementia due to progressive
cerebral ischemia;
- hypoxia in the myocardium results in angina pectoris that is the step before the myocardial
infarction;
- presence of the plaques in the lower limbs can cause ischemia, so the necrosis of muscles and
tissues, but no infarction thanks to collateral arteries, anyway necrosis is quite painful and the
patients with the femoral artery affected start to limp because of the pain (claudication walk).
- In case of the occlusion of the renal artery, there can be renal failures.
fig.14 fig.15
Alessandra Giorgi, Beatriz Vitorino
32
