Aging and Frailty
● what is aging?
the physiological process characterized by the progressive and
continuous loss of function of cells, tissues, organs and systems with
time. Aging is influenced by genetics but especially by the
environment. Physiological, pathological and environmental factors
can affect our personal way to age.
● when describing the aging process: what are the major theories to
keep in mind?
○ No single theory adequately describes the aging process, aging is
a multifactorial and multi-step process (i.e: it is not caused by just
one thing and it does not happen all at once, it’s cumulative)
● It is believed that aging is the result of
○ a combination of insults accumulated throughout the life of the
individual that may include: smoke, radiation, pollution, bad
nutrition, viruses, bacteria, Hereditary Factors
● some of which may favor or simply add up to
○ the progressive buildup of genetic mutations
● that lead to
○ cell death, tissue damage, reduced ability to repair and renew,
inflammation
● resulting in aging.
There are also other aspects that contribute to the progression of
aging:
○ mitochondrial dysfunction
○ oxidative stress
○ depletion of stem cells
○ cellular senescence
○ altered intercellular communication
○ altered efficacy of nutrients
● what are physical changes related to “normal” aging are not a
considered disease?
Aging-Related Physical Changes:
○ Vision:
◆ Acuity loss (cataracts, macular degeneration)
◆ Presbyopia: worsened focus
◆ Peripheral vision loss (glaucoma)
◆ Decreased dark adaptation, contrast sensitivity
○ Hearing/Vestibular:
◆ Presbycusis (high-frequency hearing loss)
◆ Vestibular dysfunction
○ Oral/Dental:
◆ 40% elderly edentulous
◆ Altered taste, salivary function
○ Central Nervous System:
◆ Neurodegeneration after 80
◆ Slower learning
◆ Memory activity decline
◆ Challenges in multitasking
◆ "Use it or lose it" principle
○ Muscles/Bones:
◆ Moderate muscle mass reduction is normal
◆ Sarcopenia risk with excessive muscle loss
◆ Postmenopausal bone density decrease
◆ Osteoarthritis risk
○ Heart/Circulatory:
◆ Reduced efficiency over time
◆ Atherosclerosis
◆ Vascular changes: elasticity loss, increased stiffness
○ Respiratory:
◆ Less efficient blood oxygenation
◆ Decline in oxygen delivery and blood flow
○ Renal:
◆ Decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
○ Gastrointestinal:
◆ Decreased GI absorptive cells, motility
◆ GERD due to reduced sphincter activity
◆ Reduced GI blood flow, gastric acid secretion, active transport
● what is frailty?
Frailty is an age-related state of high vulnerability to adverse health
outcomes after a stressor event due to a reduced healthy adaptation
to stress
Frail adults are at high risk, in the face of stressors for falls, disability,
development of geriatric diseases, delayed and incomplete recovery,
adverse outcomes of hospitalization, mortality.
● what are the signs and symptoms of frailty?
○ Sarcopenia
○ Inflammation
◆ Elevated CRP
○ Decreased heart rate variability
○ Altered hemostasis
○ Insulin resistance
○ Anemia
○ Decreased DHEA, IGF1, cortisol
○ Micronutrient deficiencies
● ● what is “inflammaging”? what are the mecchanisms?
Inflammaging is the chronic inflammation (elevated blood
inflammatory markers) associated with aging → susceptibility to
frailty, CVD, cancer, dementia, kidney disease, disability, and
premature death.
Mechanisms:
○ genetic susceptibility: some SNP affect levels of blood
inflammatory markers.
○ central obesity visceral fat produces inflammatory adipokines
such as IL6, IL8, TNF-alpha. PAI1 (thrombosis), MCP1
(inflammation), angiotensinogen (hypertension), resistin (insulin
resistance and inflammation), etc.
○ changes to microbiota composition and increased gut
permeability: reduction in beneficial commensal microorganisms
such as Coprococcus, Fecalibacterium, and Lactobacillus. There’s
a prevalence of facultative anaerobes such as Fusobacterium and
Staphylococcus (associated with increased levels of inflammatory
cytokines in plasma) Increased gut dysbiosis has been postulated
to increase mucosal barrier permeability, thereby allowing the entry
of bacteria and their products, including pathogen- and damage-
associated molecular patterns (PAMPs and DAMPs), into the
circulatory system
○ cellular senescence
Cellular senescence is a state in which cells undergo a permanent
growth arrest, meaning they stop dividing and proliferating. This
process is characterized by changes in cellular morphology, gene
expression, and function. Cellular senescence is a natural and
complex biological phenomenon that can be triggered by various
factors, including DNA damage, telomere shortening, and stress.
Genes associated with cell cycle regulation are downregulated,
while others linked to inflammation and tissue remodeling are
upregulated.
genetic variations (SNPs) near genes involved in controlling cellular
aging (senescence) and inflammatory responses may influence an
individual's susceptibility to or risk of developing age-related
diseases
○ NLRP3 inflammasome activation
○ oxidative stress caused by dysfunctional mitochondria
○ immune cell dysregulation
○ chronic infections
● what are some interventions to improve quality and duration of the
life?
○ prevention of DM2, CVD, cancer, etc.
○ exercise
○ ○ diet: decreased ability to absorb and utilize nutrients make nutrient
requirements increase. Chronic conditions and medications can
affect nutrition requirements (Drug-induced vitamin/mineral
deficiency) Aging is often accompanied by a loss of appetite and
changes in taste and smell, all of which can lead to more limited
food choices and lower intake of healthy foods.
